--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 1 Issue 4 
2019 
Basel III B: Basel III Overview Basel III B: Basel III Overview 
Christian M. McNamara 
Yale School of Management 
Michael Wedow 
European Central Bank 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Corporate Finance Commons, Economic History 
Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and Financial Management 
Commons, International Economics Commons, International Law Commons, International Relations 
Commons, Organizational Behavior and Theory Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods 
Commons, Political Economy Commons, Public Affairs Commons, Public Policy Commons, Securities 
Law Commons, Transnational Law Commons, and the Work, Economy and Organizations Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
McNamara, Christian M.; Wedow, Michael; and Metrick, Andrew (2019) "Basel III B: Basel III Overview," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 1 : Iss. 4, 59-69. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1039 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol1/iss4/4 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol1/iss4/4

--- Page 3 ---
Basel III B:  
Basel III Overview1   
 
Christian M. McNamara2 
Michael Wedow3 
Andrew Metrick4 
 
 
 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2014-4a-v1 
November 1, 2014, Revised: January 22, 2020 
Abstract 
In the wake of the financial crisis of 2007-09, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
(BCBS) faced the critical task of diagnosing what went wrong and then updating regulatory 
standards aimed at preventing it from occurring again.  In seeking to strengthen the 
microprudential regulation associated with the earlier Basel Accords while also adding a 
macroprudential overlay, Basel III consists of proposals in three main areas intended to 
address 1) capital reform, 2) liquidity standards, and 3) systemic risk and 
interconnectedness. This case considers the causes of the 2007 -09 financial crisis and what 
they suggest about weaknesses in the Basel regime as it then existed. It then summarizes the 
provisions of Basel III to allow for an evaluation of whether it was an effective r esponse to 
the causes of the financial crisis. 
  
__________________________________________________________________ 
1  This module is one of seven produced by the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) examining issues 
related to Basel III. The other modules in this series are: 
• Basel III A: Regulatory History  
• Basel III C: Internal Risk Models. 
• Basel III D: The Swiss Finish to Basel III  
• Basel III E: Synthetic Financing by Prime Brokers  
• Basel III F: Callable Commercial Paper 
• Basel III G: Shadow Banking and Project Finance 
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises. 
2  Director, New Bagehot Project and Senior Editor, Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS), Yale School of 
Management. 
3  Principal Expert, European Central Bank, Directorate Financial Stability, Financial Services Policy Division. 
This co-author’s contribution represents his personal opinions and do es not necessarily reflect the 
views of the European Central Bank or its staff. 
4  Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management, and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of 
Management. 
59

--- Page 4 ---
1.  Introduction  
In the wake of the financial crisis of 2007 -09, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
(BCBS) faced the critical task of diagnosing what went wrong and then updating regulatory 
standards aimed at preventing it from occurring again.  In seeking to strengthen the 
microprudential regulation associated with the earlier Basel Accords while also adding a 
macroprudential overlay, Basel III consists of proposals in three main areas intended to 
address the critical factors the BCBS identified as contributing to the financial crisis: 
1. That troubled banks held an inadequate amount of capital and that the capital they 
did hold was of an insufficient quality (Capital Reform) 
2. That even adequately capitalized banks experienced difficulties due to insufficient 
liquidity (Liquidity Standards) 
3. That the interconnectedness of financial institutions transmitted shocks across the 
financial system and the broader economy (Systemic Risk and Interconnectedness)  
Each of these three areas is examined in greater detail in the subsequent sections of this 
module. The discussion focuses on Pillar 1 of the Basel framework.  (For an overview of 
Pillars 2 and 3 of the Basel framework, see YPFS Case Study McNamara, et al 2014A.) 
Capital Reform: Under Basel III, banks must improve both the quantity and quality of their 
capital. The minimum ratio of common equity to risk -weighted assets (RWA) has been 
increased from 2% to 4.5%, with total capital required to represent at least 8% of RWA.  A 
capital conservation buffer of 2.5% and a countercyclical buffer of between 0% a nd 2.5% 
have also been introduced. Additionally, Basel III establishes a leverage ratio requiring banks 
to maintain Tier 1 capital that is at least 3% of total exposure. 
Liquidity Standards: Basel III introduces two new liquidity measurements.  Under the 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio, banks must maintain a sufficient quantity of high -quality liquid 
assets to cover expected outflows in a 30 -day stressed funding scenario.  The Net Stable 
Funding Ratio, on the other hand, compares available funding sources with the f unding 
needs associated with the banks’ assets and exposures. In addition to these standards, Basel 
III introduces several liquidity monitoring tools for banks to use on an ongoing basis to 
report information to regulators. 
Systemic Risk and Interconnected ness: Basel III includes several measures aimed at 
addressing the threat of contagion given the interconnectedness that exists in the financial 
markets. Higher capital requirements have been given to systemic derivatives and inter -
financial exposures, and a capital surcharge of 1% to 2.5% in common equity has been 
introduced for banks deemed systemically important. Additionally, the BCBS has established 
a Large Exposure Framework that limits the exposure an internationally active bank can 
have to a single counterparty.  
The remainder of the case is organized as follows : Section 2 provides an overview of the 
updated risk -based capital requirements established by Basel III.  Section 3 outlines the 
leverage ratio intended to serve as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirements. Section 
4 introduces the new liquidity standards that Basel III has made a part of the Basel 
framework. Section 5 discusses the provisions of Basel III targeted at the systemic risk 
stemming from interconnectedness. 
 
60
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
Questions 
1. What were the causes of the 2007 -09 financial crisis , and what do those causes 
suggest about weaknesses in the Basel regime as it then existed?  
2. Is Basel III an effective response to the causes of the financial crisis?  
2. Capital Reform—Risk-Based Capital Requirements 
In the wake of the financial crisis, the BCBS concluded both that troubled banks held an 
inadequate amount of capital and that the capital they did hold was of an insufficient quality. 
To combat this, Basel III requires banks improve both aspects of their capital base.  
Basel III’s emphasis on improved quality revolves around a refinement of the tiered 
approach to defining capital introduced by Basel I and carried forward by Basel II.  Under 
Basel III, “Tier 1 Capital” is intended to allow a bank to remain a going concern by absorbing 
significant losses while remaining solvent. To accomplish this, the Basel III framework calls 
for the majority of Tier 1 Capital to be common equity.  This is reflected in the updated 
minimum capital standards set forth in Basel III, which require banks to maintain “Common 
Equity Tier 1” of at least 4.5% of RWA and total Tier 1 Capital of at least 6.0% of RWA. 
“Tier 2 Capital,” on the other hand, is considered “gone-concern capital” under Basel III and 
is intended to absorb losses to protect depositors in the event of insolvency. With Basel III’s 
elimination of Tier 3 Capital, Total Capital is defined as the sum of Tier 1 Capital and Tier 2 
Capital and must equal at least 8.0% of RWA.  (To review Base l III’s definition of Common 
Equity Tier 1, Tier 1 Capital , and Tier 2 Capital, see pages 12 through 28 of Bank for 
International Settlements rev. 2011.) 
In addition to the minimum capital requirements outlined above, Basel III establishes two 
capital buffers: (1) a capital conservation buffer of Common Equity Tier 1 equal to 2.5% of 
RWA “which is designed to ensure that banks build up capital buffers outside periods of 
stress which can be drawn down as losses are incurred” and (2) a countercyclical buffer of 
Common Equity Tier 1 equal to between 0% and 2.5% of RWA (to be determined on an 
ongoing basis by national regulators) intended to “build up additional capital defenses in 
periods where the risks of system -wide stress are growing markedly.”  (See Bank fo r 
International Settlements rev. 2011, 54 and 57.)  
The resulting capital framework is shown in Figure 1 below (For a detailed discussion of how 
RWA is calculated for purposes of the risk-based capital requirements, see YPFS Case Study 
McNamara, et al. 2014D.):  
Figure 1: Capital Requirements and Buffers (all numbers in percent) 
 Common Equity Tier 1 Tier 1 Capital Total Capital 
Minimum 4.5 6.0 8.0 
Conservation Buffer 2.5   
Minimum plus Buffer 7.0 8.5 10.5 
Countercyclical Buffer range 0-2.5   
Source: Bank for International Settlements rev. 2011, Annex 1. 
61
Basel III B McNamara et al.

--- Page 6 ---
3. Capital Reform—Leverage Ratio 
The risk -based capital requirements outlined above necessarily involve significant 
complexity, with each of a bank’s assets needing to be assigned a specific risk weight.  As 
outlined in greater detail in another YPFS Case Study ( McNamara, et al 2014D), since Basel 
II, banks have had the ability to make use of internal models in calculating RWA, resulting in 
what critics have described as an ability to “game the system” by meeting the new 
requirements through overly aggressive modeling that keeps RWA artificially low.  Thus, as 
a backstop to the risk-weighted capital requirements and because during the financial crisis 
“[i]n many cases banks built up exce ssive leverage while still showing strong risk -based 
capital ratios,” Basel III introduces “a simple, transparent, non-risk-based leverage ratio that 
is calibrated to act as a credible supplementary measure to risk-based capital requirements” 
(Bank for International Settlements rev. 2011, 61). 
The leverage ratio established by Basel III is derived by dividing Tier 1 Capital by total 
exposure (calculated consistent with the accounting measure of exposure), subject to certain 
adjustments: 
• On-balance sheet, no n-derivative exposures are net of specific provisions and 
valuation adjustments (e.g., credit valuation adjustments) 
• Physical or financial collateral, guarantees , or credit -risk mitigation purchased are 
not allowed to reduce on-balance sheet exposures 
• Netting of loans and deposits is not allowed 
• Off-balance sheet exposure, commitments (including liquidity facilities), 
unconditionally cancellable commitments, direct credit substitutes, acceptances, 
standby letters of credit, trade letters of credit, failed t ransactions, and unsettled 
securities are fully included in the exposure measure while for any commitments that 
are unconditionally cancellable at any time by the bank without prior notice, banks 
must apply a credit conversion factor of 10% to include such  commitments in the 
exposure measure. 
The minimum leverage ratio set forth in Basel III is 3%.   
4. Liquidity Standards 
As part of Basel III, the BCBS introduced liquidity standards to the capital requirements that 
have historically been the cornerstone of  the Basel regime.  This decision is very clearly a 
product of the nature of the financial crisis of 2007 -09, which was a crisis not only of 
inadequate bank capital, but also of inadequate bank liquidity.  As the BCBS has noted, 
“[d]uring the ‘liquidity phase’ of the financial crisis that began in 2007, many banks—despite 
adequate capital levels —still experienced difficulties because they did not manage their 
liquidity in a prudent manner” (Bank for International Settlements 2013b, 1). 
With the financial crisis having illustrated the importance of ensuring that banks maintain 
both adequate capital and liquidity, the BCBS has proposed two new liquidity standards as 
part of Basel III—the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and the Net Stable Funding Ratio. The former 
is a short-term measure that evaluates whether a bank has enough liquidity to meet expected 
cash outflows during a 30 -day stress scenario. The latter is a long -term structural measure 
62
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 4

--- Page 7 ---
that evaluates the amount of funding available from st able sources relative to the funding 
needs of the bank’s assets. 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio 
The purpose of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) is to “promote the short -term resilience 
of the liquidity risk profile of banks by ensuring that they have sufficient [high quality liquid 
assets (HQLA)] to survive a significant stress scenario lasting 30 calendar days”  (Bank for 
International Settlements 2013b, 4). Underlying this 30-day standard is the belief that by the 
30th day of a stress scenario, bank management and regulators will have had adequate time 
to take steps to address the situation, including corrective actions by management and 
regulators, central bank intervention, or the orderly resolution of particular banks. The LCR 
evaluates banks’ ability to survive to the 30th day by comparing the stock of HQLA to the total 
net cash outflows anticipated over the 30 calendar days. 
Under the LCR, a bank would begin by determining the value of its stock of unencumbered 
HQLA (assets that can be easily and immediatel y converted into cash at little or no loss of 
value) in stressed conditions.  The stock of HQLA can include different categories of assets, 
with the LCR calculation setting limits on and applying “haircuts” (discounts from the current 
market value) to certain types of assets. For example, corporate debt securities with a rating 
of AA- or higher and a record of liquidity are included in the Level 2A category of assets, a 
category to which a 15% haircut is applied and which, along with Level 2B, is limited to 40% 
of total HQLA. 
The bank would then divide the value of its stock of unencumbered HQLA by the value of the 
total net cash outflows from the bank expected to occur over the next 30 calendar days given 
stressed conditions. To calculate total expected cash  outflows, the bank would multiply the 
outstanding amounts of various types of liabilities and commitments by an expected run-off 
rate designated for each liability or commitment type by the BCBS.  For example, retail 
deposits covered by typical deposit insurance have an expected run-off rate of 5%, reflecting 
the belief of the BCBS that approximately 5% of such deposits will be withdrawn in a 30-day 
stress scenario. Banks must also include other potential sources of cash outflows, including 
increased liquidity needs related to credit downgrades and collateral calls and drawdowns 
on committed lending facilities.  The calculation of total cash inflows, in turn, requires that 
banks look only to contractual inflows (including interest payments) fr om fully performing 
exposures for which there is no expectation of default during the 30 -day window.  
Significantly, the amount of inflows to cover outflows has been limited to a maximum of 75% 
of outflows.  This means that banks must hold HQLA of at least 2 5% of their outflows 
regardless of expected inflows.   
By dividing the value of its stock of unencumbered HQLA by the value of total net cash 
outflows expected to occur over the next 30 calendar days given stressed conditions, a bank 
arrives at a percentage that reflects its ability to readily meet immediate liquidity demands 
in a stress scenario. The timeline established by the BCBS calls for banks to achieve an LCR 
of 60% by January 1, 2015, and an LCR of 100% by January 1, 2019. Thus from 2019 onward, 
the idea is that banks will be able to survive a significant stress scenario lasting up to 30 days 
without resorting to the sale of illiquid assets to meet liquidity demands. (For a more detailed 
examination of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and how it has already affected one key area of 
the financial markets, see YPFS Case Study McNamara, et al. 2014F.) 
Net Stable Funding Ratio 
Coming out of the financial crisis, the BCBS also identified a need “[t]o promote more 
medium and long -term funding of the a ssets and activities of banking organizations” to 
63
Basel III B McNamara et al.

--- Page 8 ---
prevent the reoccurrence of a balance sheet mismatch that created significant problems in 
2007-09—the use of short -term funding to back long -term assets and exposures  (Bank for 
International Settlements 2010, 25). With this in mind, the BCBS has proposed a Net Stable 
Funding Ratio (NSFR) “to reduce funding risk over a longer time horizon by requiring banks 
to fund their activities with sufficiently stable sources of funding”  (Bank for International 
Settlements 2014a, 2). In order to achieve this, the NSFR evaluates a bank’s available amount 
of stable funding (capital and liabilities expected to be reliable over a one -year timeframe) 
relative to its required amount of stable funding (based on the liquidity cha racteristics and 
residual maturities of the bank’s assets and off -balance sheet exposures).  The NSFR 
mandates that the ratio of available stable funding (ASF) to required stable funding (RSF) be 
at least 100% on an ongoing basis. Thus, the less liquid and longer-term a bank’s assets and 
exposures, the more stable funding it will need to have available to it. 
Figure 2: Net Stable Funding Requirement 
 
Source: Bank for International Settlements 2014a, 6.) 
Under the NSFR framework, the calculation of total ASF requires a bank to assign the 
carrying value of all of its capital and liabilities to one of five categories created by the BCBS 
to reflect differing degrees of maturity and likelihood of withdrawal.  Each of these five 
categories has a corresponding ASF factor that indicates the percentage of the capital and 
liabilities in that category that may be included in the calculation of ASF.  These categories 
and their ASF factors are shown in Figure 3. 
Figure 3: Summary of Liability Categories and Associated ASF Factors 
 
Source: Bank for International Settlements 2014c, 6. 
64
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 4

--- Page 9 ---
Similarly, to calculate its RSF a bank must assign each of its assets to one of several categories 
created by the BCBS with corresponding RSF factors “intended to approximate the amount 
of a particular asset that would have to be funded, either because it will be rolled over, or 
because it could not be monetised through sale or used as collateral in a secured borrowing 
transaction over the course of one year without significant expense” (Bank for International 
Settlements 2014a, 6). For example, the highly liquid assets included in the first four RSF 
categories receive RSF factors ranging from 0% to 15% reflecting the fact that the bank could 
with relative ease sell or use the assets as collateral to raise funds within the one-year NSFR 
timeframe.  
For the complete set of RSF categories, see Figure 4. (For a more detailed examination of the 
Net Stable Funding Ratio and how it may already be affecting one key area of the financial 
markets, see YPFS Case Study McNamara, et al. 2014G.) 
Figure 4: Summary of Asset Categories and Associated RSF Factors 
 
Source: Bank for International Settlements 2014a, 9. 
65
Basel III B McNamara et al.

--- Page 10 ---
In addition to these new standards, Basel III introduces several new liquidity monitoring 
tools intended to “capture specific information related to a bank’s cash flows, balance sheet 
structure, available unencumbered collateral , and certain market indicators,” with results 
shared with the relevant financial regulators (Bank for International Settlements 2013, 40). 
A summary of these liquidity measuring tools is shown in Figure 5. 
Figure 5: Basel III Liquidity Measuring Tools 
 
Source: Bank for International Settlements 2013, 40. 
5. Systemic Risk and Interconnectedness 
As the BCBS has concluded of the financial crisis, “excessive interconnectedness among 
systemically important banks also transmitted shocks across the financial system and 
economy” (Bank for International Settlements rev 2011). The BCBS has made addressing the 
systemic risk created by this interconnectedness a cornerstone of Basel III. In addition to the 
basic risk-based capital requirements described above, Basel III established a higher loss 
absorbency requirement for institutions deemed to be global systemically  important banks 
(G-SIBs). This requirement, currently ranging from Common Equity Tier 1 equal to between 
66
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 4

--- Page 11 ---
1.0% and 2.5% of RWA, reflects a determination by BCBS that the minimum capital 
requirements of Basel III “are not sufficient to address the negative externalities posed by G-
SIBs or to protect the system from the wider spillover risks of G-SIBs” (Bank for International 
Settlements 2013a, 3 ). Under the Basel III framework, determinations about which banks 
qualify as G-SIBs subject to the requirement are based on “a global, system-wide loss-given-
default concept” that evaluates institutions in five equally weighted categories comprised of 
individual indicators: 
Figure 6: Indicator-Based Measurement Approach 
 
Source: Bank for International Settlements 2013a, 5-6. 
 
Under Basel III, banks seen as systemically important because of their cross -jurisdictional 
activity, size, interconnectedness, lack of substitutability , and/or complexity must thus 
maintain even more capital.  (For a more detailed discussion of the higher loss absorbency 
requirement for G-SIBs, see pages 2-15 of Bank for International Settlements 2013a.) 
In addition to the systemic risk and interconnectedn ess provisions contained in Basel III 
itself, the BCBS in 2014 also adopted a “Large Exposure Framework” intended to limit, as a 
percentage of the bank’s eligible capital, the amount of exposure an internationally active 
bank can have to a single counterparty. In general, the Large Exposure Framework prevents 
banks from having an exposure to a single counterparty that is higher than 25% of the 
effective amount of its Tier 1 Capital.  For exposures between global systemically important 
banks, this limit is re duced to 15%.  The purpose of these limits is to ensure that banks 
“consistently measure, aggregate and control exposures to single counterparties or to groups 
of connected counterparties across their books and operations” so that “the maximum loss a 
bank could face in the event of a sudden counterparty failure [is limited] to a level that does 
not endanger the bank’s solvency”  (Bank for International Settlements 2014b, 1 ). (For a 
complete description of the Large Exposure Framework, see Bank for Internation al 
Settlements 2014b.) 
67
Basel III B McNamara et al.

--- Page 12 ---
References 
Bank for International Settlements, 2006.  Basel II: International Convergence of Capital 
Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Framework – Comprehensive Version: 19 – 209 
(Part 2: The First Pillar – Minimum Capital Requirements) 
Bank for International Settlements, 2010.  Basel III: International Framework for Liquidity 
Risk Measurement, Standards and Monitoring: 25-31 (Net Stable Funding Ratio) 
Bank for International Settlements.  Rev. 2011. Basel III: A Global  Regulatory Framework for 
More Resilient Banks and Banking Systems . June. (Bank for International Settlements rev. 
2011): 1-8 (Introduction, Strengthening the Global Capital Framework)  
___________.12-27 (Minimum Capital Requirements and Buffers) 
___________.54-64 (Capital Conservation Buffer, Countercyclical Buffer and Leverage Ratio) 
___________.Annex 4 (Phase-In Arrangements) 
Bank for International Settlements.  2013. Global Systemically Important Banks:  Updated 
Assessment Methodology and the Higher Loss Absorbency Requirement . July. (Bank for 
International Settlements, 2013a): 2-4 (Introduction) 
___________.4-11 (Methodology for Assessing Systemic Importance of G-SIBs) 
___________.12-14 (The Magnitude of the Higher Loss Absorbency Requirement and Its Impact 
and Instruments to Meet the Higher Loss Absorbency Requirement) 
___________.14-15 (Interaction with Other Elements of the Basel III Framework) 
___________.15 and Annex 3 (Phase-In Arrangements) 
Bank for International Settlements. 2013. Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and liquidity 
risk monitoring tools. January. (Bank for International Settlements 2013b): 1-6 (Introduction 
to the LCR) 
Bank for International Settlements.  2014. Basel III: The Net Stable Funding Ratio . January. 
(Bank for International Settlements 2014a) 
Bank for International Settlements.  2014. Supervisory framework for measuring and 
controlling large exposures. April. (Bank for International Settlements 2014b) 
Bank for International Settlements. 2014.   Basel III: The Net Stable Funding Ratio . October. 
(Bank for International Settlements 2014c)  
McNamara, Christian M., Thomas Piontek, and Andrew Metrick, 2014A.  Basel III A:  
Regulatory History, Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2014 -1A-V1, November. 
(McNamara, et al. 2014A) 
McNamara, Christian M., Natalia Tente, and Andrew Metrick, 2014D. Basel III D: Swiss Finish, 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2014 -1D-V1, November. (McNamara, et al. 
2014D) 
68
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 4

--- Page 13 ---
McNamara, Christian M. and Andrew Metrick, 2014F. Basel III F: Callable Commercial Paper, 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2014 -1F-V1, November. (McNamara, et al. 
2014F) 
McNamara, Christian M. and Andrew Metrick, 2014G. Basel III G: Shadow Banking and Project 
Finance, Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2014-1G-V1, November. (McNamara, 
et al. 2014G) 
 
 
Development of this case has been supported by a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation to the Yale Program on Financial Stability. 
Copyright 2014, 2015, 20 20 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this 
material or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the 
Yale Program for Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
 
 
69
Basel III B McNamara et al.