--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 1 Issue 4 
2019 
Lessons Learned: Ray Dalio Lessons Learned: Ray Dalio 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale School of Management 
Kaleb B. Nygaard 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Business and Corporate Communications Commons, Comparative Politics Commons, 
Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Organizational Behavior 
and Theory Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the 
Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Metrick, Andrew; Wiggins, Rosalind Z.; and Nygaard, Kaleb B. (2019) "Lessons Learned: Ray Dalio," Journal 
of Financial Crises: Vol. 1 : Iss. 4, 120-122. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1046 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol1/iss4/10 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol1/iss4/10

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Ray Dalio 
 
By Andrew Metrick, Rosalind Z. Wiggins, and Kaleb B. Nygaard 
 
Ray Dalio, who is the Founder, Chairman, and Co-Chief Investment Officer of Bridgewater 
Associates, the largest hedge fund in the world, gives his take on the Great Financial Crisis of 
2007-2009 and financial crisis fighting more broadly. These comments are based on an 
interview with Mr. Dalio. 
 
Focusing on the Granular and Getting Around the Politics 
In 2007 I wrote that I saw a big debt crisis coming in our Daily Observations to clients. That 
led to Tim Geithner inviting me to lunch just before the collapse and rescue of Bear Stearns. 
It was while he was President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yo rk. In advance of our 
lunch he had reviewed a few Bridgewater studies laying out our reasoning. The way we 
anticipated the financial crisis was by examining the numbers with a deep level of 
granularity and because I had examined many big debt crises in past times.  
Tim asked me, “Where did you get these numbers?” 
I responded, “They’re pretty much all public numbers - a lot of them are Federal Reserve 
numbers.”  There were a lot of them. One has to gather them and examine them in detail to 
do the pro forma financial projections to see debt problems on the horizon.  
Nowadays there exists the technological capacity to view what is happening at very granular 
levels and doing calculations at granular levels using algorithms.  However, many 
policymakers still have an antiquated way of looking simply at aggregates and concepts like 
supply and demand, rather than looking at what’s happening with cash flows at a nitty gritty, 
entity by entity level. In fact, back in 2007 most policy makers weren’t even interested in 
looking at these pro forma calculations even when they were being pointed out to them. 
When I offered to take them through the numbers they typically said something like “if we 
can have the markets have confidence that things will be OK then the markets wil l come to 
our support so we just need to show the markets why they should be confident.”  
That was so macro and so wrong because in many cases the flows and the marker pricing 
had nothing to do with investors’ having confidence, and there is no simple mark et of the 
sort they imagine - there are different individual participants, each with their own individual 
motivations.  In most cases back then those in the financial system could have had all the 
confidence in the world but they still wouldn’t have had th e money and credit to make the 
debt purchases that were needed to fill the funding gaps so we wouldn’t have a debt crisis.  
120

--- Page 4 ---
When policymakers deal with the market with the degree of vagueness I’ve seen, they aren’t 
going to be able to understand or effecti vely deal with the situation. Tim was the exception. 
He wanted to get in the numbers and, from that day forward, and all through the next couple 
of turbulent years, he was interested in having that perspective.  
This was not just an issue for the U.S. in 2 008-09. The same thing happened in 2010 -11 in 
Europe when we calculated how lending growth was unsustainable and we were going to 
have a sovereign debt crisis. We could see that the amount of debt that had to be rolled over 
plus the amount of new debt that needed to be issued to fund new borrowings would be too 
great relative to the amount of credit that could be lent. It was obvious that the balance sheets 
of the banks had expanded from one level to another level and simply could not expand much 
more. The credit growth that would usually arise from going to the next level was going to 
have to stop for basic mechanical reasons. That meant that there would be less credit growth 
and less expansion, which would create a funding gap. In 2009 -2010 I explained this to key 
European policy makers who once again weren’t interested into getting into the details. They 
were looking at the aggregate with the belief that confidence is all that mattered.  
During both financial crises I saw the best policy makers impeded from doing the right things 
by political and legal constraints. I saw that happen many times in other big debt crises. 
Sometimes rule of law and regulations can come up short relative to common sense. That’s 
because no law or contract can be written with such  precision that it is going to be good 
enough for all types of situations. That’s just the way it is. 
In moments of financial panic there have to be exceptions to rules. It takes courage by policy 
makers to do the needed things that aren’t clearly by the r ulebook. I think that provisions 
should be made for extraordinary powers to do the unexpected if there is good broad 
agreement - perhaps via the president, the heads of the two houses, and the head of the Fed 
(or something like that) allowing them to break  certain rules in certain ways under certain 
circumstances.   
Coordinating fiscal and monetary policies well is also extremely important.  This will be 
especially important as we go into an era in which we’re going to run bigger deficits and 
central bank policies are not going to be as effective; therefore, the changes and policies are 
going to require a greater amount of coordination of fiscal and monetary policy. The greater 
debts will mean there will be more need for debt monetization and more coordinati on 
between fiscal and monetary policy makers. This level of coordination will inevitably lead to 
increased politicization of economic policies.  
 
Using Macroprudential Policies  
If you run monetary policy by changing interest rates or by changing QE, that is not as 
surgical or precise as macroprudential policies. I think that central banks should use more 
macroprudential policies to be more precisely surgical to produce a better result. If they see 
a potential problem with one segment of the financial system, they can focus policy needed 
on just that segment. We can compare this to cancer treatments. In some cases, today it’s 
possible to target a specific area or troubled part of t he body for treatment instead of using 
the full blown radiation treatment. When possible, this is much better because full radiation 
121
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
hits the whole body and might do more harm than good. I won’t comment on specific 
macroprudential policies at the moment be cause there are so many situations and 
particulars, but the idea of using more surgical interventions is one worth considering. 
 
Communicating During Financial Crises 
Before sharing some general thoughts regarding how policymakers should approach 
communicating about financial crisis interventions, let me say that I believe that having the 
right people in the right place is so important. Ultimately, it’s more important and essential 
that they do the right thing regardless of the sensitivity to or impact of t he communication 
strategy. 
It’s helpful to think through a few questions like the following when designing the 
communication plan, “Who is communicating with whom and for what purpose? What am I 
trying to achieve? What are the motivations of the people wit h whom I’m communicating? 
Do I need to communicate with everyone? Who are the key players?” Then when delivering 
the actual communication, it’s challenging but important that the policymakers don’t sound 
defensive or paint a rosier picture than really exists because they lose credibility. Remember 
how the real Stress Test is the banks that showed the real problems of the banks signaled 
the bottom? It gave confidence that the problems were seen which made it more likely that 
they would be dealt with.  
As you go deeper than the generic communication you can begin to engineer your message 
on a more granular level. Based on the policymaker’s goal, there will be some people that 
matter and others that don’t. For example, some of the most important financial crisi s 
decisions have to be authorized by the legislature. How can you engineer your 
communications to target those individuals in the legislature that you need to win over? 
Again, if you want to do a good job - engineer it, get specific, break it down.  
When we talk about financial crisis communication, some people imagine policymakers are 
going to do something like FDR’s [US President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] fireside chat 
that’s going to be broadcast and convince the whole world. That’s not the way of 
communication today. They should really be thinking 21st century communication. 
Specifically - how can they communicate either to a specific decision maker or to a specific 
group? 
 
Dated: November 2019 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-26 
122
Lessons Learned: Ray Dalio Metrick et al.