--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 1 Issue 2 
2019 
JPMorgan Chase London Whale H: Cross-Border Regulation JPMorgan Chase London Whale H: Cross-Border Regulation 
Arwin G. Zeissler 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Administrative Law Commons, Banking and Finance Law Commons, Business Law, Public 
Responsibility, and Ethics Commons, Business Organizations Law Commons, Corporate Finance 
Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and Financial Management 
Commons, International Law Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, Public Policy 
Commons, and the Work, Economy and Organizations Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Zeissler, Arwin G. and Metrick, Andrew (2019) "JPMorgan Chase London Whale H: Cross-Border 
Regulation," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 1 : Iss. 2, 146-156. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1021 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol1/iss2/9 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol1/iss2/9

--- Page 3 ---
JPMorgan Chase London Whale  H: 
Cross-Border Regulation1 
Arwin G. Zeissler 2 
Andrew  Metrick 3 
Yale Program o n Financial Stability Case Study  2014-2h-V1 
December 1, 2014, Revised: July 21, 2015  
 
 
Abstract 
As a global financial service provider, JPMorgan Chase (JPM) is supervised by banking 
regulatory agencies in different countries.  Bruno Iksil, the derivatives trader 
primarily responsible for the $6 billion trading loss in 2012, was based in JPM’s 
London office. This office was regulat ed both by the Office of the Comptroller of the 
Currency (OCC) of the United States  (US) and by the Financial Services Authority 
(FSA), which served as the sole regulator of all financial services in the United 
Kingdom (UK). Banking regulators in the US and the UK have entered into agreements 
with one another to define basic parameters for sharing information gathered during 
bank examinations and even assisting one another with bank inspections under 
certain circumstances.  However, even as JPM sought to sti fle OCC and FSA 
supervision, cooperation between the US and UK regulators was minimal.  
_____________________________________________________________________ 
1  This case study is one of nine produced by the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) 
examining issues related to the JPMorgan Chase London Whale.  The following are the other case 
studies in this case series: 
• JPMorgan Chase London Whale A: Risky Business 
• JPMorgan Chase London Whale B: Derivatives Valuation 
• JPMorgan Chase London Whale C: Risk Limits, Metrics, and Models  
• JPMorgan Chase London Whale D: Risk-Management Practices 
• JPMorgan Chase London Whale E: Supervisory Oversight 
• JPMorgan Chase London Whale F: Required Securities Disclosures 
• JPMorgan Chase London Whale G: Hedging Versus Proprietary Trading  
• JPMorgan Chase London Whale Z: Background and Overview. 
Cases are available at the Journal of Financial Crises. 
2  Project Editor, Case Study and Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management  
3 Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management, and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of 
Management 
146

--- Page 4 ---
1.  Introduction 
On April 2, 2012, the Financial Services Authority (FSA), which regulated all financial 
services in the United Kingdom (UK), embarked on an ambitious restructuring plan 
specifically designed to ultimately replace itself with two successor regulatory agencies the 
following year.  Not even a full week into the reorganization on April 6, the FSA was 
confronted by news reports that a  London-based trader for JPMorgan Chase & Company 
(JPM) had taken sizeable derivatives positions that potentially exposed the bank to large 
losses, since the trader single -handedly distorted the market for insurance against default 
by corporate borrowers.  In the end, this incident cost the bank over $6 billion in market -
related losses and an additional $1 billion in government-imposed penalties. 
The FSA had taken over the supervision of banks in the UK from the Bank of England in 1998, 
and the Authority evolved over the next decade to become the sole regulator of all financial 
services in the UK, in contrast to the patchwork of regulatory agencies in the United States.  
However, because this single regulator model was deemed inadequate in light of the financial 
crisis of 2007 -09, the UK government overhauled its financial regulatory framework, 
replacing the FSA with the Prudential Regulation Authority and the Financial Conduct 
Authority in 2013. 
As a global financial service provider, JPM is subject to supervi sion by banking regulatory 
agencies in different countries.  JPM’s commercial bank subsidiaries hold a US national 
charter and thus are regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). Bruno 
Iksil, the derivatives trader referenced in the April 6 media reports, was based in the London 
office of JPM’s Chief Investment Office (CIO).  The OCC was the primary US -based regulator 
of CIO’s activities both in the US and in the UK, including those of Iksil, since CIO’s main 
responsibility was to invest excess deposits generated by JPM’s commercial bank units. The 
FSA also regulated JPM’s London operations, including those of the CIO. 
Of course, JPM is not the only large US bank to have significant operations in the UK, just as 
some large British banks also have material operations in the US.  As a result, banking 
regulators in the US and the UK have entered into Memoranda of Understanding with one 
another to define basic parameters for sharing information gathered during bank 
examinations and even assist ing one another with bank inspections under certain 
circumstances. Despite the fact that the OCC and the FSA were parties to such a 
memorandum, the actual amount of cooperation in supervising JPM’s London office appears 
to have been minimal. The US Senate subcommittee that investigated the 2012 trading loss 
matter made no mention in its 300-page report that the OCC ever requested assistance from 
its UK counterpart in examining CIO’s London office. 
Though all domestic and foreign banks operating in the UK ar e required by the FSA 
Principles for Businesses to deal with regulators in an open and cooperative way, the CIO 
withheld critical data from the FSA in 2012 about the dramatic increase in the size of Iksil’s 
credit derivative positions and the continued losses suffered by his portfolio. 
The remainder of the case is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the CIO and its London 
operations, as well as the agreement by US and UK banking regulators to share information. 
Section 3 surveys the evolution of the f inancial regulatory regime in the UK since 1997.  
Section 4 details FSA’s complaints of being misled by JPM as the London Whale saga was 
unfolding in 2012.  Section 5 concludes with a discussion of the penalties levied by the UK 
banking regulator against JPM , as well as the role of supervisory colleges.  (See Appendix 1 
for a timeline of key events pertinent to this case module.) 
147
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Questions 
1. What resources did the OCC have available (both on its own and in partnership 
with UK regulators) to examine CIO’s London operations? Did the OCC make 
sufficient use of these resources? 
2. Could the timing of the FSA reorganization in April 2012 have contributed to 
weaker oversight of JPM at that time? 
3. How did JPM attempt to stifle FSA/FCA supervision? 
4. What role, if any, could supervisory colleges have played in preventing/detecting 
the London Whale incident? 
5. What are the impediments to cross-border regulatory cooperation, and can these 
impediments be removed? 
2.  The Extent of US/UK Cross-Border Regulatory Cooperation 
In 2005, JPM separated its CIO from its Treasury unit, with CIO becoming a separate unit 
within the bank.  As JPM grew into the largest US bank holding company after the financial 
crisis of 2007-09, the CIO likewise grew in importance, managing approximately $350 billion 
of low -risk fixed income securities by December 31, 2011.  These securities were funded 
using excess deposits generated by JPM’s commercial banking subsidiaries (i.e., deposits that 
had not otherwise been loaned to the bank’s customers). By year-end 2011, the CIO had 428 
employees based in New York and London, consisting of 140 front -office traders and 288 
middle- and back-office staff (JPM Task Force 2013, 21). 
Achilles Macris, who was the head of CIO’s London office, had received approval in 20 06 to 
begin trading credit derivatives, such as credit default swaps, as a way to hedge some of the 
credit risk emanating from JPM’s commercial banking units. This effort to partially offset the 
bank’s default risk eventually became known as the Synthetic Credit Portfolio (SCP), and this 
trading strategy led to total net revenue of almost $1.8 billion from 2008 through 2011  (US 
Senate Report, 56). 
Three London -based CIO employees were responsible for the SCP on a daily basis.  Javier 
Martin-Artajo, the head of credit and equity trading, reported to Macris and directly oversaw 
the SCP.  Bruno Iksil, who would come to be known as the “London Whale ,” reported to 
Martin-Artajo and was the senior trader for the SCP.  Julien Grout was a junior trader and 
reported to Iksil (US Senate Report, 24-25). 
Because CIO’s main activities were closely related to JPM’s banking subsidiaries, CIO’s 
primary US regulator was the OCC. The OCC was established in the 1860s to charter, regulate, 
and supervise all national banks.  By 2011, the OCC supervised about 2,000 banks using a 
staff of 3,700 employees stationed in over 60 field offices across the country grouped under 
four district offices (OCC Annual Report 2011, inside cover). 
JPM is not the only large US bank to have significant o perations in the UK.  In fact, the OCC 
maintains an office in London to better supervise the international activities of the national 
banks under its jurisdiction. Likewise, various UK banks also have material operations in the 
US. The Bank of England entered into a joint Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the 
primary US banking regulators in 1996 “[i]n view of the fact that a number of banking 
organizations incorporated in the United States and the United Kingdom have material 
148
JPMorgan Chase London Whale H Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 6 ---
operations in each of the respective jurisdictions”  (BOE MOU, 4 ). The OCC, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Federal Reserve Board were party to this MOU. 
In addition to calling for signatories to meet at least annually to discuss general supervisory 
developments and specific concerns about cross-border banks, the MOU calls for the sharing 
of information. The US and UK regulators agreed to share “material supervisory concerns” 
(if specific banks broke the law or otherwise operated in an unsafe or unsound manner), the 
status of remedial actions imposed on banks, and information contained in examination and 
inspection reports of cross-border branches and subsidiaries. 
Though each country’s regulators would retain primary responsibility for examining all 
domestic and foreign branches and subsidiaries of banks headquartered in that country (i.e., 
a US regulator would examine US and UK branches of a US bank), the home country regulator 
could ask the host regulator to conduct an examination on its behalf “on an exceptional basis” 
(BOE MOU, 4-7). 
The US Senate subcommittee that investigated the 2012 CIO losses made no mention in its 
300-page report that the OCC requested assistance from its UK counterpart in examining 
CIO’s London office.  However, this perhaps would have been a worthwhile undertaking.  
Whereas the OCC had examiners with derivatives expertise stationed in its London office, 
the agency “did not task any of its London staff to conduct examinations of the CIO’s London 
operations,” even though the SCP was pursui ng complicated strategies involving credit 
derivatives (US Senate Report, 219). 
 (When the Bank of England’s duty to supervise UK banks was transferred to the Financial 
Services Authority in 1998, the MOU was carried forward to reflect this fact.  Likewise, the 
MOU remained in effect after the Financial Services Authority was replaced by the Prudential 
Regulation Authority and the Financial Conduct Authority in 2013. See Section 3 for a further 
discussion of the evolution of the financial regulatory regime in the UK.) 
3.  Overview of the UK Financial Regulatory Regime 
At the same time that London-based JPM employee Bruno Iksil was ramping up the size and 
complexity of his credit derivative trading strategy at the start of 2012, the financial 
regulatory regime  in the UK was undergoing its most profound changes in more than a 
decade. 
In 1997, the Chancellor of the Exchequer began the process of merging banking supervision 
and investment services regulation into the existing Securities and Investment Board, which 
then changed its name to the Financial Services Authority (FSA).  In stark contrast to the 
longstanding patchwork of banking and financial regulatory agencies in the US, the scope of 
the FSA’s authority grew over the following decade, until it became the sole financial services 
regulator in the UK (FSA History). 
1. Banking supervision (1998, from the Bank of England) 
2. UK stock listings (2000, from the London Stock Exchange) 
3. Securities and futures markets (2001) 
4. Investment management (2001) 
5. Mortgage finance (2004) 
149
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
6. Insurance (2005) 
Due to the perception that this single -regulator model had proven inadequate during the 
financial crisis of 2007-09, and shortly after the change of government in the UK in May 2010, 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced in June 201 0 that the UK government would 
overhaul its financial regulatory framework, including replacing the FSA with two new 
successor agencies, the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) and the Financial Conduct 
Authority (FCA) (FSA Regulatory Reform). (See Figure 1.)  
Figure 1: Primary Responsibilities of the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) and the 
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) 
 
Source: FSA Regulatory Reform.  
 
Banks, insurers, and major investment firms (referred to as “PRA-authorised”) are dual 
regulated; that is, they are supervised by the PRA for prudential matters and by the FCA for 
conduct issues. All other financial firms are supervised by the FCA for both prudential and 
conduct matters (FSA Regulatory Reform). (See Figure 2.) 
In preparation for the change, FSA reorganized itself internally into a so-called “twin peaks” 
operating model, separating prudential and conduct regulation on April 2, 2012, a year 
before the official legal creation of the PRA and FCA on Apri l 1, 2013.  (FSA Regulatory 
Reform) Importantly, the start of the FSA transition on April 2, 2012, came at the beginning 
of the very same week in which the huge size and complexity of Iksil’s credit-derivative bets 
were exposed in articles published by Bloomberg and the Wall Street Journal on April 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150
JPMorgan Chase London Whale H Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2: Prudential Regulation Authority and Financial Conduct Authority 
 
Source: FSA Regulatory Reform.  
4.  Misleading the FSA/FCA 
One of the reasons given by the FCA in its 2013 final notice penalizing JPM was the bank’s 
failure to be open and cooperative with the regulator.  (The final notice covered events that 
took place in 2012, when the FSA was still the UK banking regulator, but the notice was 
issued in September 2013, by which time the FSA had been replaced by the FCA as discussed 
in Section 3.)  FSA’s claim that JPM was not forthcoming about CIO’s trading activities was 
based on a written request made by the FSA in November 2010 that it be informed of: 
(a) any significant growth in  assets or change in CIO’s Europe, Middle East and Asia 
portfolios, including the SCP; (b) any significant change in CIO’s level of risk appetite; 
(c) any material change to portfolio mandates or risk limits allocated to CIO’s Europe, 
Middle East and Asia portfolios, which included the SCP; and (d) material changes to 
CIO’s Europe, Middle East and Asia strategy. (FCA Final Notice, 42) 
The FSA would hold quarterly supervisory meetings with JPM.  The first -quarter 2012 
meeting took place on March 28 and was at tended by London -based CIO and SCP 
management. The SCP was discussed during the meeting, but JPM personnel did not inform 
the FSA of certain important facts. 
Though JPM provided analysis to the FSA showing that the SCP had lost $170 million through 
February and was expected to lose an additional $51 million in March, the trading strategy 
had in fact already lost a total of $298 million by March 27.  (SCP would go on to lose $319 
million just on March 31, for a total of $719 million for the quarter.)  JPM sought to placate 
the FSA about the size of the losses with analysis showing that SCP’s Value at Risk (VaR) had 
apparently decreased from an average of $92 million during January to only $48 million by 
151
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
March 16. However, the bank neglected to mention that the primary reason for the drop was 
because CIO changed the risk model that is used to calculate VaR at the end of January.  
Likewise, JPM did not inform FSA that the size of the credit derivative positions in the SCP 
had more than doubled from $51 billion of net notional value at December 31, 2011, to $131 
billion by March 26. (SCP would grow to $151 billion of net notional value by March 31.)  In 
addition, JPM did not notify the FSA that the breach of a key risk limit less than a week before 
the March 28 meeting between the bank and the regulator had finally caused the CIO to halt 
active trading of the SCP on March 23 (FCA Final Notice, 42-43). 
The following week began with the internal reorganization of the FSA into separate 
prudential and conduct business unit s on Monday, April 2, and ended with the first news 
stories about the London Whale trades on Friday, April 6. Like its counterparts in the US, the 
FSA was caught off guard by the media reports and immediately requested more information 
from the bank about Iksil and his trading activities.  In a conference call on April 10, CIO 
London management assured the FSA that the SCP had not materially changed since the 
March 28 meeting and that the news stories were about credit derivatives that were “broadly 
a hedge of the firm’s exposures outside CIO.” However, CIO management failed to inform the 
FSA that cumulative losses from the portfolio in question were more than $700 million 
during the first quarter and were expected to and in fact did exceed $1 billion by the end of 
the April 10 trading day (FCA Final Notice, 43-44). 
The JPMorgan Chase Management Task Force (JPM Task Force) launched its internal 
investigation of the CIO losses in May 2012, and senior bank management met with the FSA 
on June 20 to discuss the initial findings of the investigation. Though the JPM Task Force was 
aware by this date that the SCP traders may have incorrectly reported the fair value of the 
credit derivatives they traded in an effort to hide their increasing losses and that the bank’s 
legal advisors had started interviewing the SCP traders as a result, this information was not 
shared with the FSA. JPM senior management only informed the FSA on July 2 that the bank 
had uncovered evidence causing it to doubt the accuracy of the SCP fair va lue reporting 
process. Not long thereafter, JPM announced publicly on July 13 that it was restating first-
quarter earnings, reducing consolidated total net revenue by $660 million from $26.712 
billion to $26.052 billion, which in turn reduced after -tax net income by $459 million from 
$5.383 billion to $4.924 billion (FCA Final Notice, 45). 
5.  Aftermath 
On September 19, 2013, the FCA joined with banking regulators in the US to announce a 
global settlement with JPM pertaining to the 2012 London Whale trades. The FCA, the 
Federal Reserve Board, the OCC, and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
penalized JPM a total of $920 million.  One month later, the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission (CFTC) also settled with the bank for a penalty of $100 million. 
While the various regulatory agencies focused on different elements of the CIO losses in their 
respective settlement agreements with the bank, the FCA levied a penalty of £137,610,000 
(about $220 million) because JPM’s “conduct demonstrated flaws permeating all levels of the 
firm: from portfolio level right up to senior management, resulting in breaches of Principles 
2, 3, 5, and 11 of the FCA’s Principles for Businesses” (FCA Press Release). 
In its September 19 press release, the FCA commented that  the joint settlement agreement 
resulted from a “significant cross-border investigation” and thanked the following US parties 
“for their cooperation”: the SEC, the US Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New 
York, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the OCC, the New York Federal Reserve Bank, and 
152
JPMorgan Chase London Whale H Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 10 ---
the CFTC (FCA Press Release). However, the Federal Reserve Board, the OCC, and the SEC did 
not mention the existence of any cross-border investigation in their respective press releases 
of September 19 announcing the settlement. 
Though MOU, such as the one between the US and the UK, have existed on a bilateral and 
multilateral basis for many years, some of these cooperative arrangements were later 
formalized as “supervisory colleges” in the 2000s.  In resp onse, the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision (BCBS) published Good Practice Principles on Supervisory Colleges  in 
2010 pertaining to these “permanent but flexible structures for collaboration, coordination, 
and information -sharing among the authorities  responsible for and involved in the 
supervision of cross-border banking groups” (BCBS 2014, 1). 
Figure 3: Financial Conduct Authority Principles for Businesses 
 
Source: FCA Press Release.  
 
In June 2014, the BCBS revised these recommendations, now entitled Principles for Effective 
Supervisory Colleges , to reflect changes in supervisory best practice that arose from the 
recent financial crisis. See Appendix 2 for a summary of the seven principles. 
References 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.  2014. Principles for Effective Super visory 
Colleges. June. 1-18. (BCBS 2014) 
Bank of England, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation, Office of the Com ptroller of the Currency. 1996. Memorandum of 
Understanding. November 19, updated June 1, 1998. 1-9 [note: page numbers as used in the 
Adobe Acrobat page navigation toolbar]. (BOE MOU) 
Financial Conduct Authority.  2013. Final Notice: JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. September 18. 
41-45. (FCA Final Notice) 
___________. 2013. JPMorgan Chase Bank N.A. Fined £137,610,000 for Serious Failings Relating 
to Its Chief Investment Office’s “London Whale” Trades . September 19. (FCA Press Release) 
accessed at http://www.fca.org.uk/news/jpmorgan-chase-bank-na-fined 
153
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
Financial Services Authority.  2011. History. Last updated February 24.  (FSA History) 
accessed at http://www.fsa.gov.uk/about/who/history 
___________. 2012. Annual Report: 2011/12. March 31. 4, 18-23. (FSA Annual Report 2011/12) 
___________. 2013. Regulatory Reform . Last updated February 26.  (FSA Regulatory Reform) 
accessed at http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pages/about/what/reg_reform/index.shtml 
JPMorgan Chase & Co.  2013. Report of JPMorgan Chase &. Co. Management Task F orce 
Regarding 2012 CIO Losses. January 16. 21-25. (JPM Task Force 2013) 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. 2011. Annual Report: Fiscal Year 2011. September. 
Inside Cover. (OCC Annual Report 2011) 
United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Inve stigations. 2013. JPMorgan Chase 
Whale Trades: A Case History of Derivatives Risks and Abuses (Exhibits).  March 15.  15-30 
[note: page numbers as used in the Adobe Acrobat page navigation toolbar].  (US Senate 
Exhibits) 
___________. 2013. JPMorgan Chase Whale Trades: A Case History of Derivatives Risks and Abuses 
(Majority and Minority Staff Report). March 15. 21-25, 56, 219. (US Senate Report) 
 
 
Development of this case has been supported by a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation to the Yale Program on Financial Stability. 
Copyright 2014, 2015, 2019 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this 
material or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the 
Yale Program for Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
 
  
154
JPMorgan Chase London Whale H Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 12 ---
Appendix 1: Timeline of Key Events 
1997  
Financial Services Authority (FSA) formed in the United 
Kingdom (UK) as a successor to the Securities and Investment 
Board. 
1998  FSA took over banking supervision. 
2000  FSA took over approval of UK stock listings. 
2001  FSA took over regulation of investment management firms, as 
well as securities and futures markets. 
2004  FSA took over mortgage regulation. 
2005  
FSA took over insurance regulation.  JPMorgan Chase & 
Company (JPM) spun off its Chief Investment Office (CIO) as a 
separate unit to invest the bank’s excess deposits. 
2006  CIO approved a proposal by Achilles Macris to trade credit 
derivatives. 
2010 June 
The UK Chancellor of the Exchequer announced that the 
government of the UK would overhaul the financial regulatory 
framework, including abolishing the Financial Services 
Authority (FSA) and splitting its functions into two new 
successor agencies. 
2011 December 31 CIO had 428 employees and managed a $350 billion portfolio 
of low-risk fixed income securities. 
2012 March 23 
Ina Drew (JPM Chief Investment Officer and head of CIO) 
ordered the CIO traders to stop trading the Synthetic Credit 
Portfolio (SCP). 
 March 28 FSA held a quarterly supervisory meeting with JPM. 
 April 2 
FSA reorganized itself internally into a so-called “twin peaks” 
operating model, separating prudential and conduct 
regulation. 
 April 6 Bloomberg and the Wall Street Journal  published the first 
news stories about the “London Whale.” 
 April 10 
FSA met with CIO London management for the first time since 
the media stories.  CIO management did not inform the FSA 
that cumulative losses from the SCP book were more than 
$700 million during the first quarter and were expected to , 
and in fact did, exceed $1 billion by the end of the trading day. 
 July 13 JPM restated Q1 earnings, reporting additional pre -tax losses 
of $660 million due to the SCP ($459 million after tax). 
 December 31 Year-to-date SCP losses = $6.2 billion. 
2013 April 1 FSA replaced by the Prudential Regulation Authority and the 
Financial Conduct Authority. 
 September-
October 
Four regulators in the US and one in the UK reached 
settlement agreements with JPM, totaling $1.020 billion in 
penalties. 
155
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
Appendix 2: Principles for Effective Supervisory Colleges 
Principle 1: College objectives 
“Supervisory colleges should enhance, on an ongoing and confidential basis, information 
exchange and cooperation among supervisors to support the effective supervision of 
international banking groups. Colleges should enhance the mutual trust and appreciation 
of needs and responsibilities on which supervisory relationships are built.” 
Principle 2: College structures 
“Supervisory colleges should be structured in a way that enhances effective oversight of 
international banking groups, taking into account the scale, structure and complexity of 
the banking group, its significance in host jurisdictions and the c orresponding needs of 
its supervisors. While a college is a single forum, multiple or variable substructures may 
be used given that no single college structure is likely to be suitable for all banks.” 
Principle 3: Information-sharing 
“College members should do their best to promptly share appropriate information with 
respect to a banking group’s principal risks, vulnerabilities and risk management 
practices. Mutual trust and willingness to cooperate are key for effective two -way 
information-sharing. To faci litate this process, supervisory colleges should strive 
towards confidentiality agreements among college members, such as those contained in 
memoranda of understanding.” 
Principle 4: Communication channels 
“Communication channels within a college should ensure the efficiency, ease of use, 
integrity and confidentiality of information exchange. The home supervisor should make 
sound communication channels available to the college and host supervisors should use 
them appropriately and regularly.” 
Principle 5: Collaborative work 
“Supervisory colleges should promote collaborative work among members, as 
appropriate, to improve the effectiveness of the oversight of international banking 
groups. Collaborative work should be by agreement among supervisors and  should 
recognize national legal constraints.” 
Principle 6: Interaction with the institution 
“Interaction between the college members and the banking group should complement 
the interaction that individual supervisors (both home and host) have with the spe cific 
entity they supervise.” 
Principle 7: Crisis preparedness 
“Supervisory colleges are distinct from but complementary to crisis management and 
resolution structures.  The work of a banking group’s supervisory college should 
contribute to effective crisis management planning.” 
 Source: BCBS 2014, 4-18. 
156
JPMorgan Chase London Whale H Zeissler and Metrick