--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 1 Issue 3 
2019 
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A: Increasing Risk in Ireland Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A: Increasing Risk in Ireland 
Arwin G. Zeissler 
Yale School of Management 
Karen Braun-Munzinger 
European Central Bank 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, International Economics Commons, International 
Relations Commons, Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, 
Political Economy Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Zeissler, Arwin G.; Braun-Munzinger, Karen; and Metrick, Andrew (2019) "Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A: 
Increasing Risk in Ireland," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 1 : Iss. 3, 1-15. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1025 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol1/iss3/1 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol1/iss3/1

--- Page 3 ---
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A:  
Increasing Risk in Ireland1   
 
Arwin G. Zeissler2 
Karen Braun-Munzinger3 
Andrew Metrick4 
 
 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2014-4a-v1 
December 1, 2014, Revised: March 16, 2015, October 30, 2019 
Abstract 
Ireland went from being the poorest member of the European Economic Community in 1973 
to enjoying the second highest per -capita income among European countries by 2007. 
Healthy growth in the 1990s eventually gave way to a concentrated boom in property -
related lending in the 2000s. The growth in the aggregate loan balances of Ireland’s six major 
banks greatly exceeded the growth in gross domestic product (GDP); as a result, bank loan 
balances grew from 1.1 times GDP in 2000 to over 2.0 times GDP by 2007. Given the small 
size of the domestic retail depositor base, the Irish banks increasingly funded loan growth 
using the wholesale market, despite its risks. The property -related lending boom proved 
unsustainable during the global financial crisis, and, on September 29, 2008, the government 
of Ireland took the unprecedented step of guaranteeing the deposits and substantially all 
other liabilities of the major Irish banks. 
  
__________________________________________________________________ 
1  This module is one of four produced by the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) examining issues 
impacting Ireland and Iceland in the years surrounding the global financial cr isis. The following are the other 
modules in this case series. 
• Ireland and Iceland in Crisis B: Decreasing Loan Loss Provisions in Ireland  
• Ireland and Iceland in Crisis C: Iceland’s Landsbanki Icesave 
• Ireland and Iceland in Crisis D: Similarities and Differences 
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises. 
2  Project Editor, Case Study and Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
3  Senior Advisor, Prudential Policy Division, Bank of England. Any views expressed are solely those of the 
author and so cannot be taken to represent those of the Bank of England or to state Bank of England policy . 
4  Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management, and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of 
Management. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
1.   Introduction  
On the evening of Monday, September 29, 2008, just weeks after the failure of the United 
States investment bank Lehman Brothers and the subsequent seizing up of the global 
financial system, the government of Ireland took the bold step of guaranteeing the deposits 
and substantially all other liabilities of the six major Irish banks, together with those of the 
Postbank (a unit of the state- owned postal service that offered simple banking services). 
These Irish banks came to be referred to as the “covered banks” because they had their 
liabilities covered by the government guarantee. 
1. Allied Irish Banks 
2. Anglo Irish Bank 
3. Bank of Ireland 
4. EBS Building Society 
5. Irish Life and Permanent 
6. Irish Nationwide Building Society 
7. Postbank Ireland 
The guarantee was very comprehensive, extending even to uninsured deposits and to 
unsecured liabilities. As a result, the amount guaranteed was €375 billion, approximately 
double Ireland’s gross domestic product. This case module will focus on the increasing risk 
in the Irish financial system in the years leading up to 2008, while a separate case module 
will compare the Irish government’s guarantee with actions taken by the government of 
Iceland in response to the crisis. 
The nation of Ireland transitioned from being the poorest member of the European Economic 
Community when it joined in 1973 to enjoying the fastest population growth of all European 
Union member states and the second highest per -capita income by 2007. However, healthy 
economic growth based on deregulation, low income tax rates, and a competitive cost 
structure in the 1990s eventually gave way to a boom in property -related lending in the 
2000s that proved unsustainable during the global financial crisis. 
The aggregate loan balances of Ireland’s covered banks more than tripled from €120 billion 
in 2000 to €400 b illion by 2007, while speculative commercial loans grew nine- fold. The 
growth in loans far exceeded the growth in gross domestic product (GDP). As a result, total 
loans and advances by the covered banks grew from 1.1 times GDP in 2000 to over 2.0 times 
GDP by 2007. 
This rapid growth in property -related lending resulted from a combination of factors. 
Ireland’s economy and income caught up with those of its European neighbors, bolstering 
the ability and desire to own property. In addition, the Irish government gave tax incentives 
to boost property ownership. Ireland adopted the euro in 1999, which reduced exchange 
rate risk and interest rates, making it easier for people to borrow. Ireland’s banks sought to 
defend their market share by increasing property -related lending. The banks increasingly 
funded these loans in the wholesale market (borrowing from banks and other financial 
firms), despite the attendant risks. 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
The remainder of the case is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a factual description of 
the growth in Irish property-related lending and property values. Section 3 details how the 
economic background, monetary policy, fiscal policy, and increased competition in the 
banking sector combined to cause such rapid growth in property-related lending in Ireland. 
Section 4 briefly describes how Ireland’s central bank, the International Monetary Fund, and 
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development reacted to the growth in 
lending. Section 5 discusses how Irish banks funded much of the increase in loan balances 
with wholesale borrowing, together with some reasons for, and risks of, this funding 
strategy. Section 6 summarizes the collapse of the Irish banking system and the resulting 
government guarantee. 
Questions 
1. What are some useful qualitative indicators that macro -prudential financial 
regulators could monitor to assess the possibility of increased risks in a 
rapidly growing economy? 
2. What are some quantitative benchmarks that regulators could calculate to 
measure whether credit growth should merit increasing attention? 
3. Why might banks be tempted to rely excessively on short- term wholesale 
funding, and what are the risks of that strategy? 
2.  Extent of the Growth in Property-Related Lending 
Before the financial crisis of 2007-09, Ireland’s banking sector had grown rapidly during the 
2000s. As can be seen in Figure 1, the aggregate loan balances of Ireland’s covered banks 
more than tripled from €120 billion in 2000 to €400 billion by 2007. The growth in loans far 
exceeded the growth in GDP over the same time period. As a result, total loans and advances 
by just the covered banks (i.e., not all Irish banks) grew from 1.1 times GDP in 2000 to over 
2.0 times GDP by 2007 (Commission of Investigation 2011, §2.2.2). 
The composition of this loan growth can be evaluated along two dimensions: the location of 
the borrower, and the type of loan. From 2002 to 2007, domestic lending to Irish borrowers 
fluctuated between 64% and 68% of the covered banks’ total lending, as domestic and 
foreign loan balances grew at similar rates. However, loan growth was disproportionately 
concentrated in property-related lending, as shown in Figure 2 (Commission of Investigation 
2011, §2.2.5-2.2.7). 
Whereas total loan balances grew at a compound annual rate of 21.8% between 2002 and 
2007, property-related loans increased by an average of 29.4% per year. At the same time, 
the overall riskiness of these loans also increased. Residential mortgages grew at an average 
of 21.3% per year, roughly in line with total  loan growth, but the use of risky no -down-
payment loans rose from 5% in 2004 to 15% of all loans (and 30% of loans to first time home 
buyers) by 2006. Construction & property (C&P) loans, generally considered riskier than 
residential mortgages, increased more than twice as quickly, by an average of 46.0% per 
year. Furthermore, speculative C&P loans (on projects for which no construction or rental 
contract was in place) grew even faster at a compound annual rate of 56.5%. As a result, 
speculative C&P lending increased nine- fold between 2002 and 2007, from €3.8 billion to 
€34.0 billion.  
 
3
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A Zeissler et al.

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1: Loans and Advances to Customers by the Covered Banks 
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 13. 
 
Figure 2: Domestic Lending by Covered Banks to Irish Residents:  
 Compound Annual Growth Rates, 2002-07 
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 17. 
 
Of course, rapid loan growth during the early - and mid-2000s was not unique to Ireland, as 
banks in many countries expanded their lending. However, as can be seen in Figure 3, data 
collected by the European Central Bank shows that Ireland’s total lending grew faster 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
between 1999 and 2008, and also ended the period at a higher percent of GDP, than did 
lending in the United Kingdom (Ireland’s largest trading partner) and in the broader Euro 
area. (Figure 3 includes loans by all Irish banks, including the central bank, and therefore 
lending is larger relative to GDP than what is shown in Figure 1.) Focusing specifically on 
property-related lending, Ireland’s banks outpaced those in the United Kingdom, especially 
in non-residential loans, as shown in Figure 4 (Commission of Investigation 2011, §1.3.1). 
Of course, rapid loan growth during the early - and mid-2000s was not unique to Ireland, as 
banks in many countries expanded their lending. However, as can be seen in Figure 3, data 
collected by the European Central Bank shows that Ireland’s total lending grew faster 
between 1999 and 2008, and also ended the period at a higher percent of GDP, than did 
lending in the United Kingdom (Ireland’s largest trading partner) and in the broader Euro 
area (Figure 3 includes loans by all Irish banks, including the central bank, and therefore 
lending is larger relative to GDP than what is shown in Figure 1.) . Focusing specifically on 
property-related lending, Ireland’s banks outpaced those in the United Kingdom, especially 
in non-residential loans, as shown in Figure 4 (Commission of Investigation 2011, §1.3.1). 
Given the relentless expansion of property -related lending by Ireland’s banks, the fact that 
real estate prices also rose dramatically during the same time period is  not a surprise. The 
two go hand in hand. With real estate loans more readily available and featuring easier terms, 
borrowers are able to bid up prices. In turn, higher real estate prices make it easier for 
property owners to refinance existing loans, while also increasing the value of the collateral 
against which banks are lending. 
Figure 3: Lending in Ireland, the Euro Area, and the United Kingdom 
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 3. 
 
 
5
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A Zeissler et al.

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 4: Domestic Property-Related Lending in Ireland and the United Kingdom  
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 18. 
 
As can be seen in Figures 5 and 6 herein, after adjusting for inflation, new home prices in 
Ireland almost tripled between 1995 and 2007, and commercial property values actually did 
triple during the same period. This equates to real price appreciation at a compound annual 
rate of almost 9% and 10% for residential and commercial properties, respectively, above 
and beyond the inflation rate. This rate of price appreciation was almost double the average 
annual growth in Ireland’s real GDP during the period (Commission of Investigation 2011, 
§2.2.12). 
Growth in the covered banks’ loan books resulted in increased profitability. Ireland’s 
covered banks reported an aggregate profit after tax of €2.2 billion in 2000. After first 
decreasing in 2001, bank profitability then increased every year, reaching €5.6 billion in 
2007. This was an increase of approximately 155% between 2000 and 2007. This growth in 
profitability translated into even greater growth in market value, as the stock market 
capitalization of the four listed covered banks increased from €20.4 billion in January 2000 
to €57.4 billion by February 2007, as can be seen in Figure 7 (Commission of Investigation 
2011, §2.2.3-2.2.4).  
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 5: New House Prices (REAL) & Housing Construction, 1976-2008 
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 19. 
 
Figure 6:  Real Indexed Commercial Property Values – Combined Office, Retail & 
Manufacturing  
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 19. 
 
However, some part of the increase in reported Irish bank profitability must be attributed to 
the impact of an accounting pronouncement by the International Accounting Standards 
Board (IASB) that took effect in 2005. In an effort to simplify, standardize, and bring more 
objectivity to the accounting treatment of financial instruments, the IASB mandated use of 
the “incurred loss” model of setting aside reserves for loan losses, under which banks (and 
7
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A Zeissler et al.

--- Page 10 ---
other companies) are allowed to make loan loss provisions only when objective evidence 
exists at the closing balance sheet date that a loan or other receivable is impaired. Previously, 
companies would set aside larger reserves based on the probability that some borrowers 
would default in the future and not pay on time and in full (This topic is explored in greater 
detail in Zeissler et al. 2014B.). 
Figure 7: Market Capitalizations of the Listed Covered Banks  
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 14. 
3. Reasons for the Rapid Growth in Lending 
A number of factors contributed to this rapid growth in Ireland’s property -related lending. 
These factors could serve as useful precautionary signs to macro -prudential financial 
regulators in other countries. 
Macroeconomic Background 
When Ireland joined the European Economic Community as part of its 1973 expansion from 
six to nine members, it was the poorest member in the organization. Ireland continued to lag 
economically until the early 1990s, when investment was spurred by deregulation, low 
corporate incom e tax rates (10.0 to 12.5% during the 1990s), and a competitive cost 
structure resulting from trilateral wage agreements between employees, unions, and the 
government. As an export- oriented economy, Ireland benefited greatly from the reduction 
in regulations and tariffs that accompanied the launch of the European Union (EU) in 1993, 
the successor of the European Economic Community. The combination of these factors 
further fueled a period of rapid economic growth in Ireland that had started in the late 1980s 
causing it to be known as the “Celtic Tiger” (Honohan 2010, 20-21). 
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
As Ireland’s economy caught up to the rest of Europe, with per-capita income second only to 
Luxembourg among EU countries, coupled with by far the highest rate of population growth 
of all EU member states, a dramatic increase in both the ability and aspiration to own 
property resulted. Economists used this growth in income and population as the basis for 
their prediction that any future economic downturn would result in at worst a minor 
slowdown in the Irish real estate sector (Regling & Watson 2010, 21). 
Monetary Conditions 
Ireland was one of the 11 nations that adopted the euro at its initial launch on January 1, 
1999.
5 Before EU member states could adopt the euro in 1999 or in later years, they had to 
meet limits on inflation, government budget deficit, and government debt-to-GDP ratio. This 
had the desirable effect of lowering interest rates in the Eurozone countries. Ireland’s short-
term interest rates decreased by 2/3 from the early- and mid-1990s to the period from 2002 
through 2007, and the country’s real short-term interest rates were negative from 1999 to 
2005. Long-term interest rates were cut in half. This dramatic reduction in Ireland’s interest 
rates boosted asset values ( including property prices ) and made it more affordable for 
individuals and businesses to borrow, fueling the credit boom (Regling & Watson 2010, 24). 
Furthermore, by reducing or eliminating ex change-rate risk, the common euro currency 
simplified and thus fostered borrowing, lending, and investing among the Eurozone 
countries and their major trading partners. As a result, Irish banks could obtain funds more 
cheaply and thus reduce their cost of capital. However, they also faced increased competition 
from banks in neighboring countries, as discussed more fully later in this section. 
Fiscal Policy 
The Irish government was the envy of many of its European neighbors from the mid -1990s 
until 2006, since it achieved fiscal surpluses every year. The government wisely used some 
of the surplus to fund the national pension system. However, the growth rate of Ireland’s 
private sector began to slow around 2000 as the aforementioned advances in per -capita 
income began to reduce Ireland’s competitiveness relative to that of other countries. Wishing 
to sustain the spirit of the Celtic Tiger as long as possible, the government ramped up its own 
spending at a rate faster than nominal GDP each year from 2001 through  2008, in contrast 
with the spending restraint shown through 2000, as shown in Figure 8 (Regling & Watson 
2010, 25). 
In addition, more so than other EU countries, Ireland used its taxation system to favor 
property ownership, specifically home ownership. Irish property owners could deduct the 
interest portion of mortgage payments from their income tax, but they did not have to pay 
property tax, which would otherwise have raised the costs of ownership and thus perhaps 
somewhat restrained soaring property values. Also, the Irish government increasingly 
directed tax relief to the property sector (Regling & Watson 2010, 27).  
__________________________________________________________________ 
5 The others were Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, 
and Spain. 
9
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A Zeissler et al.

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 8: Annual Change in Government Spending and Nominal GDP  
 
Source: Regling & Watson 2010, 26. 
 
Increased Foreign and Domestic Competition in the Banking Sector 
Though Ireland’s economy as a whole benefited from the lower interest rates, regulation, 
and tariffs that accompanied adoption of the euro in 1999, the country’s banks faced 
increased competition. Foreign institutions, especially from the United Kingdom, competed 
aggressively with Ireland’s domestic banks by offering lower interest rates, faster approvals, 
and new residential mortgage products such as 100% loan-to-value mortgages. For example, 
the Bank of Scotland entered the Irish market in 1999 and quickly gained market share by 
offering home mortgages “at substantially lower interest rates than domestic banks at that 
time” (Commission of Investigation 2011, §2.3). Competition in Ireland’s commercial 
property lending market also increased. Consumer protection advocates in the government 
applauded the intensified competition since it provided more choices to borrowers. 
Management of domestic banks grew increasingly focused on preserving their independence 
by preventing a predatory takeover by another bank, either foreign or domestic. Bank 
officers thus sought business models and strategies that would lead to faster revenue 
growth, higher reported profits, and larger stock valuations. The answer came in the form of 
steadily increasing property values (See Section 2.) and readily available, low cost wholesale 
funding (See Section 4.), the combination of which allowed all Irish banks to grow rapidly 
without losing significant market share to one another or to foreign competitors 
(Commission of Investigation 2011, §2.3). 
  
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
4.  Reactions to the Rapid Growth in Lending 
Financial Stability Reports issued on an annual basis by the Central Bank of Ireland in the 
years before the crisis indicated an awareness of the possible risks accompanying the credit 
growth, but generally opined that the nation’s financial system could absorb these risks if 
they came to fruition. Periodic reports issued at the time by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) were similarly cautionary, yet reassuring. 
For example, the IMF Financial System Stability Assessment Update of August 2006 indicated 
that “sustained rapid credit growth” in Ireland raised the country’s household debt-to-GDP 
ratios to “among the highest in Europe” and that a “significant slowdown in growth” would 
have “adverse consequences for employment.” However, the report also noted that a 
significant slowdown in growth was “extremely unlikely in the near term,” that the financial 
system was “well placed” to handle a downturn in house prices or general economic growth, 
and that the major banks had “adequate capital buffers to cover a range of large but plausible 
hypothetical shocks” (IMF 2006, 5).  One year later, in its recurring Article IV consultation 
dated August 2007, IMF staff warned that Irish “banks have large exposures to the property 
market,” but that stress test results indicated that bank capital cushions were “adequate to 
cover a range of shocks” (IMF 2007, 1). 
In its Economic Survey of 2008, however, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) was, in total, less reassuring when commenting: 
The risks associated with the sharp run- up in domestic indebtedness have so far been 
contained. Irish banks are well-capitalized and profitable, so they should have considerable 
shock-absorption capacity. However, turmoil in the international markets continues to 
impact on the Irish financial system. Transparency in financial markets worldwide needs to 
be improved to restore confidence. It is important to prepare for downside risks and, in 
conjunction with international efforts, Ireland should consider its own arrangements. (OECD 
2008, 2). 
5.  Funding the Rapid Growth in Lending 
The growth in the balance sheets of the Irish banks described in Sections  2 and 3 may have 
been asset-driven (increased loan growth, which necessitated finding sources of funding for 
those new loans) or liability -driven (increased availability of funds, which necessitated 
finding a safe and profitable use of those extra funds).  The reports issued by the Irish 
government in 2010 and 2011 in the aftermath of the crisis favor the former explanation, 
since the rapid loan growth experienced by Ireland’s banks could not be funded by retail 
(personal and small business) deposits alone.  Banks therefore turned to the wholesale 
market for additional funding. 
The loan balances of Ireland’s covered banks exceeded the deposit balances held on behalf 
of customers by €26 billion in 2002. Over the next few years, the growth rate of loans was 
higher than the growth rate of the general economy and personal incomes, as discussed 
previously. Therefore, loan and deposit balances both grew, but loans grew much faster than 
deposits. The gap between loan and deposit balances at the covered banks quintupl ed by 
2008 to €129 billion, as can be seen in Figure 9, and the aggregate loan- to-deposit ratio of 
the Irish banking system grew to 200%, higher than in comparable euro area economies 
(Regling & Watson 2010, 33). The loan- to-deposit ratios of the covered banks are shown in 
11
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A Zeissler et al.

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 10; note that Irish Life and Permanent (IL&P) relied far more heavily on wholesale 
funding and less on deposit funding than the other covered banks. 
Ireland’s banks financed much of this gap between loans and deposits by borrowing in the 
wholesale market. The Irish government commission that investigated the country’s banking 
crisis explained, “Wholesale funding usually comprises deposits from banks, senior debt, 
asset covered securities, commercial paper, certificates of deposit, and securitizations. It 
tends to be diversified across geographies, investor types, and maturities” (Commission of 
Investigation 2011, fn 47). 
Figure 9: Domestic Funding Gap of the Covered Banks 
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 39. 
Reasons for Wholesale Funding 
Multiple reasons existed why the Irish funding gap was filled with wholesale funding, as 
opposed to other sources. As mentioned in Section 3, Ireland was one of the 11 nations that 
adopted the euro at its launch in 1999, thereby reducing or eliminating exchange- rate risk 
in cross -border borrowing, lending, and investing. As a result, wholesale funding for 
Eurozone banks was readily available in large amounts and at low interest rates, and the 
Irish banks received much of their wholesale funding from foreign lenders (Commission of 
Investigation 2011, §2.4.13). 
In addition to low-cost and easy availability, government legislation also led to increased use 
of wholesale funding in Ireland. Two of the covered banks, the EBS Building Society and the 
Irish Nationwide Building Society (INBS), historically specialized in accepting deposits from 
retail customers and making residential mortgage loans, much like savings and loan 
associations in the United States. However, the Building Societies Act of 1989 allowed 
Ireland’s building societies to make loans for residential housing development and to raise 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
funds in the wholesale market. INBS, the larger and more aggressive of the two, obtained 
almost 50% of its funding from wholesale sources by  2008 (Commission of Investigation 
2011, §2.4.6). 
Figure 10: Loan-to-Deposit Ratios of the Covered Banks  
 
Source: Commission of Investigation 2011, 40. 
Many banks around the world had adopted a business model that separated operations, 
broadly speaking, into the lending side of the business (a revenue center) and the funding 
side of the business (a cost center), with the sources and uses of funds intermediated by the 
bank’s Treasury department, which was run as a profit center. Since short- term interest 
rates are usually lower than long-term interest rates, bank Treasury employees could boost 
profitability by borrowing in the short-term wholesale market, albeit while neglecting long-
term funding stability (Commission of Investigation 2011, §2.8.6 and 5.2.10). 
Perhaps most simplistically, bank management and boards benchmarked performance 
against competitors, often with the aid of analysts and consultants. All drew comfort from 
the fact that peer banks in Ireland and in other countries also had cho sen to heavily fund 
themselves in the wholesale market (Commission of Investigation 2011, §2.8.4). 
Risks of Wholesale Funding 
One of the reasons that wholesale funding was often cheaper than other sources of funding 
at this time was because wholesale funding tended to have a shorter maturity (e.g., a bank 
may have borrowed for a single day via an overnight repo agreement, but it was unlikely to 
issue a bond for a period of a few days, weeks, or months). However, the risk of overreliance 
on sh ort-term funding was that Ireland’s banks became “more vulnerable not only to 
fluctuations in international interest rates but also to changes in market sentiment and in 
their own perceived creditworthiness” (Commission of Investigation 2011, §2.8.2). 
Ireland’s banks erred in thinking that wholesale funding would always be readily available 
at some price. Banks assumed that their wholesale lenders would raise the interest rate in a 
13
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A Zeissler et al.

--- Page 16 ---
panic situation, but banks did not think that lenders would partially or ful ly withdraw 
funding by raising the amount of required collateral or by refusing to roll over loans 
(Commission of Investigation 2011, §5.2.11). 
However, as international credit markets tightened from August 2007 into 2008, Irish banks 
also saw the amounts and maturities of their wholesale funding curtailed, especially as 
creditors grew increasingly worried that Ireland and its banks were overexposed to 
property-related lending. This sudden drying up of essential funding is, of course, exactly 
what happened to many banks around the world during the peak of the financial crisis, 
including Lehman Brothers. 
6.  Collapse 
One common finding among economic research spawned by the 2007 -09 financial crisis is 
that financial crises are typically preceded by credit booms, though not all credit booms end 
in a crisis (Gorton & Ordoñez 2014). Unfortunately, Ireland’s credit boom proved to be a “bad 
boom.” 
Anglo Irish Bank, widely considered to be the most vulnerable of Ireland’s major banks, saw 
its stock price tumble on Monday, September 29, 2008, just weeks after the failure of the 
Lehman Brothers investment firm. Bank of Ireland and Allied Irish Banks requested an 
emergency meeting with the Irish prime minister and the finance minister, worried that an 
Anglo Irish default would lead to a rapid loss of funding for the other banks. That same 
evening, the government of Ireland took the bold step of guaranteeing the deposits and 
substantially all other liabilities of the major Irish banks. The guarantee was very 
comprehensive, extending even to uninsured deposits and to unsecured liabilities. As a 
result, the amount guaranteed was €375 billion, approximately double Ireland’s gross 
domestic product (See Zeissler, et al. 2014D for a more detailed description of the Irish 
government’s guarantee and a comparison of the guarantee with actions taken by the 
government of Iceland in response to the crisis.). 
References 
Adalid, Ramon and Carsten Detken. 2007. “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price Boom/Bust 
 Cycles,” European Central Bank. Working Paper Series, Number 732. 
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin. 2008. “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability, and 
 Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Staff Report, Number 346. 
Alessi, Lucia and Carsten Detken. 2011. “Quasi Real Time Early Warning Indicators for Costly 
 Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles: a Role for Global Liquidity,” European Journal of 
 Political Economy. Volume 27, 520-533. 
Commission of Investigation into the Banking Sector in Ireland. 2011. Misjudging Risk: Causes 
 of the Systemic Banking Crisis in Ireland . March. Executive Summary, Chapters 2 and 
 5. (Commission of Investigation 2011) 
European Systemic Risk Board. 2014. Flagship Report on Macro- Prudential Policy in the 
 Banking Sector. March. 1-26. (ESRB 2014) 
Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole. 2012. “Bubbly Liquidity,” Review of Economic Studies . 
 Volume 79 (2), 678-706. 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordoñez. 2014. “Good Booms, Bad Booms,” PIER Working Paper 
 No. 14-008. December 5. 
Honohan, Patrick. 2010. The Irish Banking Crisis: Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy, 
 2003-2008. May 31. 1-136. 
International Monetary Fund. 2006. Financial System Stability Assessment Update . August. 
 Executive Summary. (IMF 2006) 
______________. 2007. Article IV Consultation. September. Executive Summary. (IMF 2007) 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2008. OECD Economic Surveys: 
 Ireland. April. Executive Summary. (OECD 2008) 
Ranciere, Romain, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann. 2008. “Systemic Crises and 
 Growth,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. Volume 123 (1), 359-406. 
Regling, Klaus and Max Watson. 2010. A Preliminary Report on the Sources of Ireland’s 
 Banking Crisis. May. 1-49. 
Zeissler, Arwin, Jihad Dagher, and Andrew  Metrick. 2014B. Ireland and Iceland in Crisis: 
 Module B: Decreasing Loan Loss Provisions in Ireland , Yale Program on Financial 
 Stability Case Study 2014-4B-V1, December. 
Zeissler, Arwin, Daisuke Ikeda, and Andrew Metrick. 2014D. Ireland and Iceland in C risis: 
 Module D: Similarities and Differences, Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
 2014-4D-V1. 
 
 
Development of this case has been supported by a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation to the Yale Program on Financial Stability. 
Copyright 2014, 2015, 2019 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this 
material or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the 
Yale Program for Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
 
 
15
Ireland and Iceland in Crisis A Zeissler et al.