--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 1 Issue 1 
2019 
Lessons Learned: Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., Esq. Lessons Learned: Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., Esq. 
Alec Buchholtz 
Yale School of Management 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Administrative Law Commons, Banking and Finance Law Commons, Corporate Finance 
Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Oral History Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods 
Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Buchholtz, Alec and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2019) "Lessons Learned: Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., Esq.," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 1 : Iss. 1, 202-204. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1009 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol1/iss1/11 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol1/iss1/11

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Thomas C. Baxter , Jr ., Esq. 
 
By Alec Buchholtz and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Baxter, who was General Counsel of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York during the 
financial crisis of 2007-2009, gives us his take on how best to prepare for future crises.1 
During a crisis, it is important to have the right people working within an agency or 
department, especially those with crisis experience.  
One of the most important aspects o f how to fight a financial crisis is ensuring you have the 
right people installed in leadership positions across an institution. The Federal Reserve was 
lucky to have had in employ professionals who had lived through the Savings & Loans Crisis 
of the 1980s, the rescue of Long -Term Capital Management in 1998, and the market 
turbulence following the September 11 th terrorist attacks.  Throughout the crisis, the Fed 
was able to draw upon the knowledge of these experienced professionals to help guide the 
Federal Reserve and its banks through the Global Financial Crisis. They helped prepare 
others who may not have had similar first -hand knowledge for how to handle the 
organizational challenges and time pressures encountered during a crisis.  
No matter what you call it, having prior knowledge of the tools and scenarios that 
would be available in a crisis and some preparation is a valuable resource. 
Whether you call it a “doomsday book” or just a  crisis playbook, knowing what types of 
interventions have been used, and could be used, in a crisis before the crisis happens is a very 
useful resource. Before the 2007 crisis, we at the Fed had thought through how we would 
respond to various scenarios and had defined disciplines for implementing such responses. 
We drew from our experiences after the 1987 mark et crash, then the Long -Term Capital 
Management in 1998 near -failure, and the September 11 th turmoil, when the stock market 
was closed for days. We memorialized the actions we took and then we went through a series 
of “war games” to simulate what we would do in certain situations. I think this type of 
exercise is a really useful thing for people in central banking who are charged with the 
responsibility for maintaining financial stability. It’s important to think through the what-ifs, 
put them down on paper , and try them out, before you get yourself into a situation where 
you have to respond.  
In a crisis, time is of the essence. Adapting or redeploying existing programs can save 
valuable time.  
In normal conditions, it usually takes weeks or months to perform the drafting, planning and 
logistical work necessary to create a new lending program. In the midst of a crisis, however, 
                                                           
1 Lessons Learned are distilled from interview(s) with the principal conducted by YPFS. 
202

--- Page 4 ---
2 
 
that time frame is compressed into days or even hours as panic spreads and companies and 
markets near collapse. The ability to adapt  a previously used facility or  operating program 
to new uses could save valuable time. A crisis is not the time to “reinvent the wheel.”  
The $85 Billion Revolving Credit Facility that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) 
entered into with American  International Group (AIG) was modeled on the term sheet that 
a private consortium had been working on before the Lehman bankruptcy constrained them 
to abandon their efforts. This term sheet provided the Fed with a template constructed by 
one of the country’s leading experts in syndicated lending and enabled it to more expediently 
craft an unprecedented loan that avoided collapse of the insurance giant and protect the 
taxpayers’ interests. Another e xample occurred when the FRBNY sought to address AIG’s 
securities lending program (one source of the rapid consumption of the $85 Billion loan) by 
purchasing the mortgage-backed securities held by the program. AIG could not use the Term-
Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), which the Fed had previously created to purchase similar 
assets from banks and primary dealers. However, r elying on the TSLF, t he Fed created a 
separate securities lending program for AIG, implementing in a much shorter timeframe, a  
project that could have taken months.   
In working with large, complex organizations government agencies need to be aware 
that such organizations may operate across multiple jurisdictions and be subject to 
many regulators.  
The businesses of many large institutions operate subject to different regulating authorities 
and across different jurisdictions  at the state and foreign level. Federal agencies helping 
these complex institutions must consider the regulators of these entities in the various 
jurisdictions, all who will have an interest in the entity and how the Fed’s role impacts it. It 
is important to note also that these r egulators will have varying range s of influence, 
sophistication, and capabilities that they will deploy to enforce their laws, and protect their 
reputations and their taxpayers.  
In the case of AIG, the Federal Reserve had to work with a variety of state i nsurance 
commissioners since many of the assets that AIG owned, posted as collateral  with the Fed, 
or were bought by the Fed , were held across different state s. Additionally, there was 
disagreement between the Fed and the state insurance commissioners about jurisdiction 
over the AIG Credit Facility Trust (AIG Trust). Through the AIG Trust the government held a 
controlling interest of AIG equity.  We were able to come to agreements that enabled the Fed 
to provide the support needed by AIG while protecting itself and the taxpayers in an 
acceptable manner. The AIG Trust was formed as a separate trust managed by independent 
trustees. 
Maintaining stability and protecting the taxpayers’ interest s should guide decisions 
about when to sell assets the government owns. 
While it might seem beneficial for the government to exit an investment quickly, the decision 
is more nuanced than that.  The trustees of the AIG trust originally thought that they would 
plan to sell the AIG stock soon and be done. But it became clear that to do so would engender 
a significant loss. Therefore, the trustees had to focus on ensuring good governance and 
203
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
3 
 
strengthening the Board of Directors to monitor the investment until it could be sold. Exiting 
a government investment should be done in a manner that is safe for the company and for 
financial markets, and the process requires patience, not only on the part of the government 
and the company, but also from the taxpayers. 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: January 2019 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-03 
 
204
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., Esq. Buchholtz and Wiggins