--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 1 Issue 2 
2019 
JPMorgan Chase London Whale E: Supervisory Oversight JPMorgan Chase London Whale E: Supervisory Oversight 
Arwin G. Zeissler 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Administrative Law Commons, Banking and Finance Law Commons, Business 
Administration, Management, and Operations Commons, Business Law, Public Responsibility, and Ethics 
Commons, Corporate Finance Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Work, Economy and 
Organizations Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Zeissler, Arwin G. and Metrick, Andrew (2019) "JPMorgan Chase London Whale E: Supervisory Oversight," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 1 : Iss. 2, 103-115. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1018 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol1/iss2/6 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol1/iss2/6

--- Page 3 ---
JPMorgan Chase London Whale E:  
Supervisory Oversight1 
Arwin G. Zeissler 2 
Andrew  Metrick 3 
 
Yale Program o n Financial Stability, Case Study 2014-2e-V1 
December 1, 2014, Revised: J uly 20, 2015  
 
Abstract 
As a diversified financial service provider and the largest United States bank holding 
company, JPMorgan Chase (JPM) is supervised by multiple regulatory agencies. JPM’s 
commercial bank subsidiaries hold a national charter and therefore are regulated by 
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). Since the bank’s Chief Investment 
Office (CIO) invested the surplus deposits of JPM’s commercial bank units, the OCC 
was also CIO’s primary regulator. During the critical period from late January through 
March 2012, when CIO traders undertook the failed derivatives strategy that 
ultimately cost the bank $6 billion, JPM did not provide the OCC with required 
monthly reports that included CIO performance data and CIO’s internal reviews of the 
fair values assigned by traders t o their derivative positions.  However, OCC 
supervisors also failed to request the missing data, and thus found themselves 
surprised by the April 6 news stories unmasking the London Whale.  
_____________________________________________________________________ 
1 This case study is one of nine produced by the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) examining 
issues related to the JPMorgan Chase London Whale.  The following are the other case studies in this 
case series: 
• JP Morgan Chase London Whale A: Risky Business 
• JP Morgan Chase London Whale B: Derivatives Valuation 
• JP Morgan Chase London Whale C: Risk Limits, Metrics, and Models  
• JP Morgan Chase London Whale D: Risk-Management Practices 
• JP Morgan Chase London Whale F: Required Securities Disclosures  
• JP Morgan Chase London Whale G: Hedging Versus Proprietary Trading 
• JP Morgan Chase London Whale H: Cross-Border Regulation 
• JP Morgan Chase London Whale Z: Background and Overview. 
Cases are available at the Journal of Financial Crises.  
2  Project Editor, Case Study and Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management . The authors 
acknowledge helpful comments from Kathleen Johnson.  
3  Janet L. Yellen  Professor of Finance and Management, and  YPFS Program Director, Yale School of 
Management 
103

--- Page 4 ---
1. Introduction 
On April 9, 2012, Thomas Curry took office as the 30 th Comptroller of the Currency. Instead 
of planning for the upcoming 150 th anniversary of the Office of the Comptroller of the 
Currency (OCC), which supervises national banks and is the oldest United States (US) 
financial regulator, Mr. Curry was confronted by the outbreak of news reports just three days 
earlier that a JPMorgan Chase & Company (JPM) trader named Bruno Iksil had bought and 
sold such large volumes of credit derivatives that he had single -handedly distorted the 
market for protection against the possible default of corporate borrowers, earning him the 
nickname the “London Whale.” 
The OCC and the US national banking system were established by a pair of laws in 1863 and 
1864 during the administration of President Abraham Linco ln. An independent bureau of 
the Treasury Department, the OCC regulates and supervises approximately 2,000 nationally 
chartered banks, federal savings associations, and US branches of foreign banks. 
As a diversified financial service provider and the large st US bank holding company, JPM is 
subject to supervision by various regulatory agencies.  JPM’s commercial bank subsidiaries 
hold a national banking charter and thus are regulated by the OCC.  The bank’s Chief 
Investment Office (CIO) was responsible for inv esting those deposits received by JPM’s 
commercial bank units that were not loaned out.  As such, the OCC was also CIO’s primary 
regulator. 
Among its secondary functions, the CIO would seek to offset some of the credit risk (also 
known as default risk) to which JPM was continually exposed in its capacity as a lender. This 
ongoing risk was to be partially hedged by CIO’s Synthetic Credit Portfolio (SCP), which was 
run out of the bank’s London office by Iksil and a small team of traders who bought and sold 
credit default swaps and other credit derivatives. 
Even though this credit hedging strategy had existed in one form or another since 2006 -07, 
the OCC first specifically became aware of the SCP book in January 2012, because the CIO 
previously included SCP hold ings and performance in broader portfolio results.  January 
2012 was also when Iksil received approval from CIO management to undertake the rapid, 
large expansion of SCP’s trading positions that would ultimately result in over $6 billion of 
losses. 
During the critical period from late January through March (when the SCP trading strategy 
was halted due to mounting losses) and into early April, JPM did not provide the OCC with 
required monthly reports that included CIO performance data and the results of CIO’s  
internal reviews of the fair values assigned by traders to their derivative positions, yet the 
OCC did not request the missing information. Furthermore, although the OCC acknowledged 
receiving timely alerts as CIO exceeded all of its applicable risk limit s at one or more points 
during the first q uarter, the agency apparently made no use of risk limit reports in its 
oversight efforts. As a result, the OCC Examiner-in-Charge of JPM admitted to being surprised 
April 6 by the news stories unmasking the London Whale. 
The remainder of the case is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief introduction to 
the history and purpose of the OCC.  Sections 3  and 4 detail the regulatory relationship 
between the OCC and JPM, including numerous failings by both parties.  Section 5 concludes 
with a discussion of OCC efforts to address the CIO losses after the initial April 6 media 
reports, OCC enforcement actions agains t JPM, and OCC reviews of its own performance in 
this matter. See Appendix 1 for a timeline of key events pertinent to this case module. 
104
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Questions 
1. Does the OCC face a dilemma because it is funded by the very same banks that it 
supervises? 
2. How did JPM attempt to stifle OCC regulation? 
3. What were shortcomings of OCC’s examinations of JPM and CIO? 
4. Would suggested improvements to OCC’s operations (such as relocating on -site 
examiners to central OCC offices) help to prevent future incidents similar to the 
London Whale trades? 
2. Overview of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
The OCC and the US national banking system were established during the administration of 
President Abraham Lincoln by the National Currency Act of 1863 and the National Bank Act 
of 1864 (OCC Annual Report 2011, ii ). Thomas Curry took office as the 30 th Comptroller of 
the Currency on April 9, 2012, just three days after Bloomberg and the Wall Street Journal  
published the first news stories about the London Whale. 
As an independent bureau of the US Treasury Department, the OCC’s responsibility is “to 
charter, regulate, and supervise all national banks and federal savings associations . . . and to 
supervise the federal branches and agencies of foreign banks” (OCC Annual Report 2011, i). 
The OCC seeks to ensure that the financial institutions under its supervision operate in a safe 
and sound manner to minimize losses to the deposit insurance fund that is operate d by the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.  In 2011, the OCC published a strategic plan for the 
fiscal years 2012 through 2016, including the agency’s mission and vision statements (see 
Figure 1.) (OCC Strategic Plan 2011, 4). 
By September 2011, the OC C had 3,700 employees and supervised approximately 2,000 
banks with total assets of almost $10 trillion.  OCC maintained headquarters in Washington 
DC, over 60 field offices across the US grouped under four district offices (Chicago, Dallas, 
Denver, and New  York), and an office in London, England, to supervise the international 
activities of the national banks under its jurisdiction (OCC Annual Report 2011, inside cover). 
Importantly, the OCC does not receive funding from the US Congress.  Instead, the OCC’s 
primary source of funding is from the national banks and federal savings associations who 
pay the OCC to examine them ( OCC Annual Report 2011, i ). Since financial institutions can 
choose to be chartered at the national or state levels, the OCC is effectively in competition for 
“customers” with the state banking regulators. 
 
 
 
 
 
105
JPMorgan Chase London Whale E Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1: The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency’s Mission and Vision 
Mission: 
To assure the safety and soundness of, and compliance with laws and regulations, fair access 
to financial services, and fair treatment of customers by national banks and federal savings 
associations. 
Vision: 
The OCC seeks to assure a financial system in which national banks and federal savings 
associations soundly manage their risks, mainta in the ability to compete effectively with 
other providers of financial services to meet the needs of their customers and communities 
for credit and financial services, comply with laws and regulations, and provide fair access to 
financial services and fair treatment of their customers. 
Source: OCC Strategic Plan 2011, 4. 
3. OCC Oversight of JPM (through 2011) 
By December 31, 2011, JPM had grown to become the largest bank holding company in the 
US, with 260,000 employees, $184 billion in total stockholders’ equity, and $2.3 trillion in 
total assets (JPM 10-K 2011, 62). JPM had two primary national bank subsidiaries: JPMorgan 
Chase Bank, which was a commercial bank with branches in 23 states, and Chase Bank USA, 
which specialized in credit cards. JPM’s main non-bank subsidiary was JPMorgan Securities, 
which was an investment banking firm (JPM 10-K 2011, 1). 
Befitting its complicated structure, JPM was supervised by many different financial 
regulators. The Federal Reserve Board oversaw the bank hol ding company structure, while 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) supervised the investment bank and some 
other non-bank subsidiaries.  The OCC regulated the national bank subsidiaries, including 
JPMorgan Chase Bank and Chase Bank USA (US Senate Report, 218). 
The OCC classified banks under its supervision by size, as either large banks ($50 billion or 
more of total assets), midsize banks (from $10 billion to $50 billion), or community banks 
(less than $10 billion).  OCC examiners kept a permanent on -site presence at the 19 biggest 
banks, including JPM. About 65 OCC employees were stationed at JPM, under the guidance of 
OCC Examiner-in-Charge Scott Waterhouse. Of these, 60 were located at JPM’s headquarters 
in New York, and five were in the bank’s London office (US Senate Report, 26 and 219). 
In addition to ongoing supervision and monitoring, the OCC supervisory team conducted 
roughly 60 examinations each year at JPM.  Each exam targeted a specific area of the bank’s 
operations and typically lasted three to six weeks.  At the end of each exam, the OCC would 
issue a Supervisory Letter to JPM senior management detailing the results, with 
recommended and/or required improvements (US Senate Report, 218). 
In 2005, JPM spun off its CIO as a separate unit to invest the bank’s excess deposits and JPM 
Chief Investment Officer Ina Drew was appointed head of CIO.  The following year, 
International Chief Investment Officer Achilles Macris received management approval of a 
proposal that he had made to allow CIO to b egin trading credit derivatives, such as credit 
106
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
default swaps, as a business hedge to “effectively manage residual exposures created by 
[JPM’s] operating businesses” (US Senate Exhibits, 35-36). 
The CIO’s primary regulator was the OCC. The OCC has stated that it would have had no role 
in approving or vetoing this proposal and may not have even been given a copy of the 
proposal (US Senate Report, 221). CIO’s credit derivatives were held as part of what came to 
be known as the “Synthetic Credit Portfolio,” which traded out of the unit’s London office. 
Although the derivatives trades that caught the attention of the media in April 2012 
primarily took place in the first quarter of 2012, Bruno Iksil and his fellow traders had 
already begun to increase the size and complexity of the SCP book in 2011. However, the OCC 
missed warning signs that these changes brought with them increased risks as well. 
The CIO exceeded its risk limit under a stress -loss scenario on January 27, 2011, as a result 
of increased trading positions in the SCP book. This breach continued for seven weeks.  JPM 
informed the OCC of the ongoing breach of CIO’s stress -loss risk limit in Market Risk 
Management Reporting e -mails and weekly Market Risk Stress Testing reports distributed 
to the agency. The CIO attributed the ongoing breach to the “synthetic credit (tranche book).” 
When the OCC asked for clarification, JPM did not provide any additional details, and the OCC 
dropped the matter. OCC staff later acknowledged that their failure to adequately follow up 
on the cause of, and the bank’s response to, the 2011 risk limit breaches was “one of our 
misses,” though the reason for this omission remains unclear ( US Senate Report, 226 ). (A 
detailed discussion of JPM’s use of quantitative tools to measure and manage risk is included 
in Zeissler, et al. 2014C.) 
4. OCC Oversight of JPM (January through early April 2012) 
A major reason why the OCC did not focus examination efforts on the SCP was because the 
CIO did not specifically name this portfolio in any of the reports that it submitted to the 
agency. Though JPM began trading credit derivatives years beforehand, and the OCC was 
aware of a “core credit portfolio” in the JPM documents it regularly reviewed, the agency first 
came across explicit mention of the SCP in a routine risk report dated January 27, 2012 ( US 
Senate Report, 227). 
CIO would regularly change the name and organization of its various portfolios, making it 
difficult for the OCC to track any one specific portfolio. For example before 2012, internal CIO 
documents (including documents presented to the JPM Board of Directors) typically would 
reference the “Tactical Asset Allocation” portfolio, which included SCP and other sub -
portfolios. CIO merged the Tactical Asset Allocation portfolio with the “Strategic Asset 
Allocation” portfolio in January 2012, the same month in which Iksil proposed the expansion 
and alteration of the credit derivative trading strategy that would ultimately cause the 2012 
CIO losses. Drew maintained that these and other changes were made for business reasons, 
rather than to mislead or confuse regulators (US Senate Report, 221-222). 
OCC examiners met on a quarterly basis with CIO Chief Financial Officer John Wilmot. During 
the January 27 meeting, Mr. Wilmot told the OCC that t he merged Tactical and Strategic 
portfolios would decrease in size during 2012, with Risk Weighted Assets (RWA) decreasing 
from $70 billion to $40 billion (US Senate Report, 228). To determine the minimum amount 
of capital that JPM and other banks must hol d, US bank regulators follow the 
recommendation of the Basel Accords on bank capital by requiring calculation of RWA, 
which is a dollar measure of a bank’s total assets, adjusted according to the riskiness of the 
assets. The amount of capital that a bank must hold is calculated as a percent of its RWA. 
107
JPMorgan Chase London Whale E Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 8 ---
However, Mr. Wilmot did not inform the OCC that Iksil had received approval on January 26 
to reduce SCP’s economic risk by selling large amounts of credit protection on (lower risk) 
investment-grade companies to offset the credit protection that was purchased on (higher 
risk) high-yield companies. The OCC instead was left with the impression that SCP risk would 
be reduced by liquidating some of the existing credit protection that Iksil had purchased, 
which would have been a simpler approach.  In testimony before the US Senate committee 
investigating the 2012 CIO losses, Wilmot countered that he did not know the specific tactics 
that the traders would use to reduce RWA (US Senate Report, 229). 
Because the CIO managed a $350 billion bond portfolio arising from JPM’s excess customer 
deposits (an amount double the size of JPM’s total stockholders’ equity in December 2011), 
the OCC required the bank to provide it with the following reports of CIO’s assets, 
profitability, and risk exposures. 
1. Executive Management Reports 
2. Valuation Control Group Reports 
3. Profit and Loss Reports 
First, the monthly Treasury Executive Management Report included basic CIO performance 
data. The OCC noted that the January 2012 report did not include the usual section on the 
CIO, but the agency was not aware that the CIO had begun issuing its own executive 
management report. As a result, the OCC did not receive the new CIO report from January 
through April.  In other words, JPM did not provide, and the OCC did not request, basic 
performance data at precisely the time that SCP trading positions and losses grew rapidly 
(US Senate Report, 230). 
Second, JPM also regularly supplied the OCC with reports prepared by CIO’s Valuation 
Control Group, which reviewed the fair -market values assigned to the SCP and CIO’s other 
portfolios on a monthly basis.  Although the OCC did not receive the CIO Valuation Control 
Group reports for February and March, the same months in which the traders mismarked 
the SCP  book in an effort to hide their growing losses, the agency failed to request these 
missing reports until after the first media stories about the London Whale appeared on April 
6 ( US Senate Report, 230 ). (A description of the CIO valuation review process, including 
failure to identify that the SCP traders were not properly marking their positions at fair 
value, is included in Zeissler, et al. 2014B.) 
Third, the OCC also received monthly CIO profit and loss reports. However, these reports did 
not list the SC P as a separate line item, thereby obscuring Iksil’s growing losses.  Only after 
JPM informed the OCC in early May that the SCP had lost $719 million during the first quarter 
and an additional $1.6 billion over the following five weeks, did the OCC insist upon receiving 
detailed daily SCP profit and loss information. Though JPM complied with this request, OCC 
examiners found that the data remained too aggregated to be useful, in contrast with the 
daily profit and loss data that OCC had been receiving from JPM’s Investment Bank for a long 
time (US Senate Report, 231-232). 
Whereas JPM failed to provide certain required reports and the OCC neglected to request 
these reports in a timely fashion, the OCC has acknowledged that its on -site examiners 
received contemporaneous daily notice as CIO exceeded all of its applicable risk limits at one 
or more points during the first quarter. (CIO risk limits applied to the unit as a whole, rather 
than to any specific portfolio.)  However, even though the OCC retained all of JP M’s market-
risk reports in a central database, the US Senate committee investigating the 2012 CIO losses 
“found no evidence that the OCC made use of the risk limit reports in its routine regulatory 
oversight efforts” (US Senate Report, 232-233). 
108
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
For exampl e, the OCC was contemporaneously notified in January 2012 , that the CIO 
exceeded not only its own Value at Risk (VaR) limit but also the higher bank -wide VaR limit 
for four consecutive days from January 16 -19. The OCC was also informed that the CIO 
intended to implement a new VaR calculation model as soon as possible to dramatically 
lower its VaR and eliminate further breaches. Nevertheless, the OCC did not investigate why 
the breach happened, nor did the agency inquire why a new model would cause such a large 
reduction in VaR. Similarly, the OCC was aware that CIO did not decrease its VaR limit when 
the new model was implemented, thereby allowing it to effectively double the market risk 
that it took. However, the agency did not challenge this. 
5. Aftermath 
On Friday, April 6, 2012, Bloomberg and the Wall Street Journal published the first reports 
of Iksil’s credit derivatives trades and the possible risks.  The OCC acknowledged being 
surprised by the media stories, despite its role as the primary regulator of the CIO (US Senate 
Report, 236). 
The OCC immediately asked JPM for additional information about the claims made in the 
stories. On April 9, the same day that Thomas Curry took office as the 30th Comptroller of the 
Currency, agency examiners met with Drew  to discuss the media reports.  She reiterated to 
the regulators that Iksil’s trading strategy was a hedge against stressful credit markets and 
that no further trading of the type mentioned in the news was planned.  The next day, JPM 
provided the OCC with a summary list of CIO’s derivative positions, but OCC examiners found 
that the list did not include profit and loss data and omitted certain derivatives altogether.  
The accompanying e -mail again affirmed that the SCP was a “dedicated hedge” ( US Senate 
Report, 237). 
On April 16, JPM provided the OCC, Federal Reserve, and the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation with a 13 -page written presentation about the SCP book, which was the first 
written response to the matter given by the bank to its regulators.  The material stated that 
the objective of the “Core Credit Book” since its 2007 inception was to “protect against a 
significant downturn in credit, offsetting natural credit exposures in CIO and the firm” ( US 
Senate Exhibits, 3 14). However, the presentation did not further detail to whom JPM was 
exposed nor the amounts that were being hedged. Furthermore, Wilmot contemporaneously 
confirmed to the OCC that the SCP book had long credit -risk exposure by this time, thereby 
adding to the default risk that JPM faced, rather than reducing risk as claimed ( US Senate 
Report, 238). 
The OCC later learned that the first-quarter SCP loss, noted in the presentation as $580 
million, had been internally reported at JPM as $719 million ( US Senate Report, 238 -239). 
During this period, JPM also failed to inform the OCC that the SCP losses had continued to 
grow rapidly even though active trading had stopped.  Year-to-date losses through April 16 
were $1.253 billion, more than $500 million higher than at quarter -end, an d more than 
double what had been disclosed to the OCC in the Synthetic Credit Book Review. 
On April 25, the OCC received a weekly summary indicating that year -to-date losses were 
$1.4 billion as of April 20. However, the OCC examiner who would have analyzed this report 
was on vacation, and none of his peers was tasked with monitoring this report in his absence. 
On May 4, JPM Chief Financial Officer Douglas Braunstein and JPM Chief Risk Officer John 
Hogan telephoned Waterhouse (the OCC Examiner-in-Charge of JPM) to inform him that the 
SCP had lost $1.6 billion thus far in the second quarter, after which OCC insisted on daily 
meetings with JPM (US Senate Report, 243-244). 
109
JPMorgan Chase London Whale E Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 10 ---
By the time JPM publicly filed its first-quarter financial results with the Securities an d 
Exchange Commission in a Form 10-Q dated May 10, quarter-to-date mark-to-market losses 
had reached $2 billion. OCC leadership held differing views of the significance of this amount. 
Michael Brosnan, the head of Large Bank Supervision, suggested to Compt roller Curry that 
the losses were more an embarrassment than anything else: “[O]bviously there isn’t a safety 
issue with these numbers, but there is an embarrassment issue for bank leadership which 
has overtly expressed pride in their ability to measure an d control risk.” Mr. Curry replied, 
“Isn’t it a little more than an embarrassment issue?” ( US Senate Report, 246 ). Total losses 
from the London Whale incident reached $6.2 billion by December 2012, however even this 
figure equaled only 3% of JPM’s total stockholder’s equity.  
OCC Review of JPM 
Determined to learn lessons from the CIO losses, Comptroller Curry called for a two -part 
internal evaluation of the “adequacy of current risk controls and risk governance at [JPM]” 
and “lessons learned from this episode that could…improve OCC supervisory approaches” 
(OCC Testimony 2012, 14). 
When evaluating the safety and soundness of a financial institution, the OCC uses the 
“CAMELS” framework, which is based on the six elements listed below. After a more rigorous 
examination of CIO’s risk management, the OCC lowered the bank’s CAMELS rating in July 
2012 because of “lax governance and oversight in the Chief Investment Office” ( US Senate 
Report, 26, 249). 
1. Capital adequacy 
2. Asset quality 
3. Management effectiveness 
4. Earnings 
5. Liquidity 
6. Sensitivity to market risk 
 
Thereafter, the OCC issued six confidential Supervisory Letters during the fall of 2012, listed 
below, which set forth 20 “Matters Requiring Attention” for which JPM was required to take 
corrective actions (US Senate Report, 249). 
1. Model Approvals and Risk-Weighted Assets 
2. Audit Coverage of CIO Activities 
3. CIO Risk-Management Review 
4. Examination of VaR-Model Risk Management 
5. Examination of CIO Valuation Governance 
6. CIO Oversight and Governance 
The OCC also took formal enforcement action against JPM.  The agency filed a Cease and 
Desist Order against JPM’s national bank in January 2013, directing it to correct deficiencies 
in its derivatives trading activity, to which the bank consented ( OCC Order AA-EC-2013-01, 
1). The Federal Reserve issued a related Cease and Desist Order against JPM’s holdin g 
company at the same time. 
110
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
The OCC was also one of five regulatory bodies that reached settlement agreements in 
September and October 2013 with JPM over the London Whale losses, penalizing the firm a 
total of $1.020 billion. While the various regulatory agencies focused on different aspects of 
the 2012 CIO losses in their respective settlements with JPM, the OCC levied a $300 million 
fine, the largest single piece of the penalty, for the following unsafe and unsound banking 
practices (OCC Order AA-EC-2013-75, 3-4). 
1. Inadequate oversight and governance to protect the bank from material risks 
2. Inadequate risk management processes and procedures 
3. Insufficient valuation control processes and procedures 
4. Ineffective internal audit processes and procedures 
5. Inadequate model-risk-management practices and procedures 
OCC Review of Itself 
The OCC completed a confidential report in October 2012 with several recommendations for 
improvement of its Large Bank Supervision division ( US Senate Report, 250 ). Though the 
self-evaluation report was confidential, as noted, Comptroller Curry’s testimony before the 
US Senate in March 2013 shed some light on the following actions that the OCC would take 
to strengthen bank supervision in the future (OCC Testimony 2013, 12-16). 
1. The need to obtain and verify timely, accurate, and complete information 
2. The need to identify and apply resources with prerequisite skills 
3. The need to apply Matters Requiring Attention appropriately 
4. The need for regular review of internal Risk-Weighted Asset models and reporting 
5. The need to look across business lines and locations and coordinate with other 
supervisors 
6. The need to identify risks associated with risky siloed business activities 
7. The need to identify changes in strategic direction 
8. The need to improve internal OCC information management systems 
 
In addition, the OCC commissioned a team of international regulators from Australia, Canada, 
and Singapore to review OCC’s approach to supervising large and midsize financial 
institutions. The report issued December 4, 2013, made broad recommendations in six areas: 
mandate and priorities, risk identification and reporting, early intervention, supervision 
staffing, supervisory methodology, and enterprise governance. 
One of the recommendations most pertinent to the 2 012 CIO losses was to “[r]elocate 
examiners that are resident in commercial banks to common OCC premises” to promote 
better communication among examination teams, to foster actual and perceived OCC 
independence from the banks being supervised, and to allow more flexible human resource 
management (OCC International Review 20113, 16). 
111
JPMorgan Chase London Whale E Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 12 ---
References 
JPMorgan Chase & Company.  2011. Form 10-K. Filed February 29, 2012, for the year ended 
December 31, 2011. 1, 62. (JPM 10-K 2011) 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. 2011. Annual Report: Fiscal Year 2011. September. 
i-ii. 
____________. 2011. The OCC’s Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2012-2016. September. 1-13. 
____________.2012. Testimony of Thomas J. Curry, Comptroller of the Currency, before the 
Financial Services Committee, United States House of Representatives.  June 19. 1-16. (OCC 
Testimony 2012) 
____________.2013. OCC Consent Order AA-EC-2013-01: In the Matter of JPMorgan Chase Bank, 
N.A., Columbus, Ohio. January 14. 1-27. (OCC Order AA-EC-2013-01) 
____________.2013. Testimony of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency before the 
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs, United States Senate. March 15. 1-21. (OCC Testimony 2013) 
____________.2013. OCC Consent Order AA-EC-2013-75: In the Matter of JPMorgan Chase Bank, 
N.A., Columbus, Ohio. September 19. 1-6. (OCC Order AA-EC-2013-75) 
____________.2013. An International Review of OCC’s Supervision of Large and Midsize 
Institutions. December 4. 1-23. (OCC International Review 2013) 
Ruhle, Stephanie, Bradley Keoun, and Mary Childs. 2012. “JPMorgan Trader’s Positions Said 
to Distort Credit Indexes,” Bloomberg. April 6. (Bloomberg 2012) 
United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee o n Investigations.  2013. JPMorgan Chase 
Whale Trades: A Case History of Derivatives Risks and Abuses (Exhibits). March 15. 15-30, 36-
37, 314-325 [note: page numbers as used in the Adobe Acrobat page navigation toolbar]. (US 
Senate Exhibits) 
____________.2013. JPMorgan Chase Whale Trades: A Case History of Derivatives Risks and 
Abuses (Majority and Minority Staff Report). March 15. 216-251. (US Senate Report) 
Zeissler, Arwin G., and Andrew Metrick. 2014B. JPMorgan Chase London Whale B: Derivatives 
Valuation, Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2014 -2B-V1,  December 1, 2014, 
Revised: August 26, 2019. 
Zeissler Arwin G., and Andrew Metrick, 2014C. JPMorgan Chase London Whale C: Risk Limits, 
Metrics and Models, Yale Program on Financial Stabi lity Case Study 2014 -2C-V1, December 
1, 2014, Revised: July 20, 2015. 
Zuckerman, Gregory and Katy Burne. 2012. “London Whale Rattles Debt Market,” Wall Street 
Journal. April 6. (WSJ 2012) 
 
 
112
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
Development of this case has been supported by a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation to the Yale Program on Financial Stability. 
Copyright 2014, 2015, 2019 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this 
material or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, pleas e contact the 
Yale Program for Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
 
  
113
JPMorgan Chase London Whale E Zeissler and Metrick

--- Page 14 ---
Appendix 1: Timeline of Key Events 
1863  Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) formed. 
2005  
JPMorgan Chase & Company (JPM) spun off the Chief 
Investment Office (CIO) as a separate unit to invest the bank’s 
excess deposits. Ina Drew, JPM’s Chief Investment Officer, was 
appointed head of CIO. 
2006  CIO approved a proposal by Achilles Macris to trade credit 
derivatives. 
2011 January 27 
Increased trading activity in CIO’s Synthetic Credit Portfolio 
(SCP) caused the CIO to exceed its stress loss risk limit for the 
next seven weeks. 
2012 January CIO merged its Tactical Asset Allocation portfolio, which 
included the SCP, with the Strategic Asset Allocation portfolio. 
 January 26 
CIO meeting at which Bruno Iksil proposed expanding SCP 
purchases of credit protection on high-yield corporate bonds, 
while selling even larger amounts of default protection on 
investment-grade corporate bonds. 
 January 27 Earliest explicit mention of SCP as a separate portfolio within 
CIO. 
 January 31 
OCC held a regularly quarterly meeting CIO Chief Financial 
Officer John Wilmot, who indicated that CIO Risk Weighted 
Assets would decrease from $70 billion to $40 billion during 
2012. 
 March 23 
Ina Drew (JPM Chief Investment Officer and head of CIO) 
ordered the CIO traders to stop trading the Synthetic Credit 
Portfolio (SCP). 
 April 6 Bloomberg and the Wall Street Journal  published the first 
news stories about the “London Whale.” 
 April 9 
Thomas Curry took office as the 30 th Comptroller of the 
Currency. OCC examiners met with Ms. Drew to discuss the 
media reports. 
 April 10 
JPM provided the OCC with a summary list of CIO derivative 
positions, but did not include profit and loss data and omitted 
certain derivatives altogether. 
 April 16 
JPM provided to the OCC, FDIC, and Federal Reserve a 13-page 
written presentation about the SCP book, which was the first 
written response to the matter given by the bank to its 
regulators. 
114
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 1 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
May 4 
JPM Chief Financial Officer Douglas Braunstein and JPM Chief 
Risk Officer John Hogan telephoned the OCC Examiner -in-
Charge of JPM to inform him that the SCP had lost $1.6 billion 
thus far in the second quarter. 
 Fall The OCC issued six Supervisory Letters to JPM, with 20 
Matters Requiring Attention that the bank needed to correct. 
 December 
31 Year-to-date SCP losses = $6.2 billion. 
2013 January The OCC filed a Cease and Desist Order against JPM, directing 
it to correct deficiencies in its derivatives trading activity. 
 September-
October 
Four regulators in the US and one in the UK reached 
settlement agreements with JPM, totaling $1.020 billion in 
penalties. 
 
 
115
JPMorgan Chase London Whale E Zeissler and Metrick