--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 2 Issue 1 
2020 
Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises 
A: Haircuts and Resolutions A: Haircuts and Resolutions 
June Rhee 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Bankruptcy Law Commons, Corporate Finance 
Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, 
Theory, and Methods Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Rhee, June and Metrick, Andrew (2020) "Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises 
A: Haircuts and Resolutions," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 2 : Iss. 1, 33-50. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1048 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss1/3 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol2/iss1/3

--- Page 3 ---
Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to 
Financial Crises A: Haircuts and Resolutions1 
 
June Rhee2 
Andrew Metrick3 
 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2014-3a-v1 
July 30, 2015 
Abstract 
After the mortgage market meltdown in mid -2007 and during the financial crisis in 2008, 
major financial institutions around the world were on the verge of collapsing one after 
another. Faced with these troubles, the government had to respond quickly to contain the 
crisis as efficiently as possible. It was, however, limited in resources, time , and experience. 
To make matters worse, the complexity and opaqueness of the financial market and these 
institutions greatly affected the government ’s ability to design an efficient and consiste nt 
method to contain the crisis. Shortly after Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy on 
September 15, 2008, American International Group (AIG) was also in deep trouble and close 
to failure when the Federal Reserve decided to bailout the institution. Washing ton Mutual 
(WaMu) and Wachovia were also facing collapse due to their exposure in risky mortgage 
products around the same time. WaMu eventually closed, and the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC), appointed as a receiver, sold parts of its business to JP Morgan Chase & 
Co. while equity holders and debtors of the institution were left to take a major haircut. On 
the other hand, Wachovia was able to avoid the same fate as WaMu through a systemic risk 
exception under the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991. This provision allowed the FDIC to 
stand behind Wachovia with Citigroup. This case provides details on the background and 
government response for each troubled financial institution during the financial crisis, and 
the rationale behind the design of each response.   
__________________________________________________________________ 
1  This case study is one of three Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) case modules considering the 
Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises. The others are:  
• Guarantees and Capital Infusions i n Response to Financial Crises B: U.S. Guarantees During the Global 
Financial Crisis. 
• Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises C: U.S. 2009 Stress Test.  
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises. 
2  Director, MMS in Systemic Risk and Senior Editor, Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS), Yale School of 
Management. 
3  Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management, and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of 
Management. 
33

--- Page 4 ---
1. Introduction  
After the mortgage market meltdown in mid -2007, the U.S. credit market continued to 
deteriorate throughout 2008, and major financial institutions were collapsing like dominos. 
The government had to act quickly to respond to each trouble. In March 2008, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) provided financing to facilitate JPMorgan Chase & Co.’s 
acquisition of the Bear Stearns Companies Inc.  In June 2008, the Federal Reserve approved 
Countrywide Financial Corporation’s acquisition by Bank of America. In July 2008, the Office 
of Thrift Supervision closed Indy Mac Bank, and the FRBNY was given the authority to le nd 
to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the two largest mortgage lenders.  
In September 2008, the financial market started to deteriorate more rapidly as Fannie Mae 
and Freddie Mac fell into government conservatorship being supported by taxpayer dollars. 
On September 15, 2008, Bank of America announced its intent to purchase Merrill Lynch, 
which was deep in troubles due to its exposure to residential mortgage -backed securities. 
On the same day, however, Lehman Brothers faced a different fate and filed for bankrup tcy, 
the largest bankruptcy case in U.S. history. A private -sector consortium consisting of 12 
major financial institutions attempted to save Lehman Brothers, but this effort failed in the 
end. The next day the Reserve Fund, a money market fund with large exposure to Lehman 
Brothers, “broke the buck” when the price of its shares fell below $1 per share. Further 
discussion on the money market fund can be found Rhee et al. 2015. 
Almost at the same time as Lehman Brothers’ collapse, American International Grou p (AIG) 
also faced the threat of a liquidity crisis itself. This time the Federal Reserve decided to step 
in, using its authority to provide support in “unusual and exigent” circumstances under the 
Federal Reserve Act. It allowed the FRBNY to extend a line-of-credit to AIG to prevent it from 
going bankrupt, and later explained that AIG was different from Lehman Brothers in terms 
of the systemic risk it imposed on the financial market and system. On the other hand, there 
are views disagreeing with the rationale behind such different government actions.  
In the meantime, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) was dealing with 
troubles at Washington Mutual (WaMu) and Wachovia. After the mortgage meltdown, WaMu 
and Wachovia both suffered large losses f rom their investments in subprime and Alt -A 
residential mortgages and runs on their deposits. WaMu was eventually closed down by the 
Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) , and the FDIC was appointed as its receiver under the 
provisions of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDI Act). The FDIC sold virtually all of the 
assets and liabilities of WaMu to JPMorgan Chase. Depositors of WaMu were fully protected. 
Debt holders of WaMu did incur losses , and when the WaMu holding company filed 
bankruptcy on September 26, 2008, its equity holders and debt holders also incurred losses. 
There were no private equity holders in WaMu.  
Wachovia was facing similar difficulties around the time WaMu closed. The government 
decided to take a different course for Wachovia and invoke  a systemic risk exception under 
the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) in order to prevent losses to creditors. The FDIC 
Board of Directors initially approved a sale of Wachovia through a closed bank resolution to 
Citigroup on September 29, 2008 , under the FDIC’s systemic risk authority. However, 
Wachovia’s Board of Directors subsequently decided to approve a sale —with no FDIC 
assistance—to Wells Fargo. Although the FDIC Board publicly stated it was ready to stand 
behind its assisted transaction with Ci tigroup, Wachovia consummated the sale to Wells 
Fargo. Since the purchase by Wells Fargo occurred without an FDIC receivership, the 
creditors—including debt holders—of Wachovia suffered no losses.  
34
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
These different responses by the government during the fin ancial crisis each had its 
rationale for the design. The decisions have been controversial to some as reflected in 
differing views provided to the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC). On the one hand, 
some criticized the failure to invoke the system ic exception for WaMu as inconsistent with 
the willingness to do so for Wachovia. On the other hand, from the perspective of the FDIC 
those resolutions followed the policy goals required of the FDIC. The FDIC argued that WaMu 
did not justify a systemic risk determination and the resolution swiftly transferred banking 
operations intact to JP Morgan Chase at no loss to the FDIC’s Deposit Insurance Fund. Under 
the FDI Act, the FDIC normally is required to resolve banks under the resolution method that 
is “least costly” to the Deposit Insurance Fund. The FDIC can depart from this standard only 
if it concludes, with the concurrence of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve and 
the Treasury Secretary, that resolving a bank under this “least costly” resoluti on method 
would “have serious adverse effects on economic conditions or financial stability” and a 
different action would “avoid or mitigate such adverse effects.” 4 Inevitably, this provision 
requires the FDIC to prefer the “least costly” resolution transaction and only to rarely use its 
authority go provide additional support from the Deposit Insurance Fund to resolve a failing 
bank. In both the WaMu and Wachovia transactions, the FDIC’s Deposit Insurance Fund 
suffered no losses. However, WaMu and Wachovi a illustrate how the situations, and 
evaluations, of two large banks could create different consequences for debt holders.  
A similar decision is required under the new special insolvency regime for failing 
systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) under the Orderly Liquidation Authority 
(OLA) provisions of Title II of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection 
Act (Dodd-Frank Act). OLA is designed exclusively to address the failure of SIFIs in cases 
where such an insolvency would  have serious adverse effects on the U.S. economy. 5 It is 
important to note that OLA supplements —rather than replaces —existing insolvency 
regimes. While there is no “least costly” requirement, OLA is designed to be used rarely and 
only if the normal insol vency process —usually the Bankruptcy Code —would create 
systemic risks. OLA remains untested.  
The remainder of the case is organized as follows: Section 2 provides details on the troubles 
of AIG and discusses the rationale behind the AIG bailout. Section 3 focuses on the resolution 
of WaMu, and Section 4 describes the government’s response to Wachovia’s troubles and 
provides comparison with WaMu’s troubles. Section 5 provides legally acceptable 
government actions under the newly established regulatory regime.   
Questions  
1. What was the difference between the Lehman Brothers and AIG situations that led to 
different response by the government? If AIG raced to file for bankruptcy before 
Lehman Brothers failed, would AIG been left to file for bankruptcy as Lehman 
Brothers did? 
 
2. Was the initial line of credit extended to AIG by the government based solely on the 
private sector consortium’s term sheet? How did the Federal Reserve rationalize that 
the initial credit amount would be enough, and why did it not seek to incorporate 
other assistance features such as a guarantee or private sector involvement? 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
4 12 U.S.C. §1823(c)(4)(C). 
5 Dodd-Frank W all Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, Title II —Orderly Liquidation 
Authority, codified at 12 U.S.C. §§5381-5397. 
35
Haircuts and Resolutions Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 6 ---
3. In contrast to the government’s more forceful imposition of limits and conditions 
during the bailout of other institutions, the FRBNY took a less forceful  stance in 
dealing with AIG credit default swap counterparties during the restructuring of AIG, 
i.e. allowing them not to take on a haircut (counterparties taking less than 100 cents 
on the dollar in exchange for terminating CDS contracts with AIG). What w as the 
reason behind this and was this decision affected by the fact that the Federal Reserve 
was not the primary regulator of AIG?  
 
4. An amendment to Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act by the Dodd -Frank Wall 
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd -Frank Act) now may limit the 
Federal Reserve’s power in bailing out future AIGs. How will future policy makers be 
able to deal with an AIG-like problem? 
  
5. What were the FDIC’s expectations of the effect on the financial market when it 
decided to resolve WaMu? Did the FDIC expect closing WaMu may further exacerbate 
the panic in the market?  
 
6. What was decidedly different for Wachovia from WaMu in invoking the systemic risk 
exception? Unlike they did with Wachovia, why didn’t the Federal R eserve and the 
Treasury push for a systemic risk exception at WaMu? Did the experience and market 
reaction from WaMu’s failure affect the decision to save Wachovia?  
 
7. Unlike Wachovia, AIG’s bailout did not have private sectors’ involvement. Why did the 
Federal Reserve take this course of design in AIG bailout? 
 
8. In comparing the government’s responses to different institutions, should there be 
prescribed criteria in deciding which organization imposes systemic risks, and if so, 
how could this help in preventing and responding to a future crisis? 
 
9. What were the hurdles in designing the Resolution Plan and the OLA, and do they 
effectively solve the problem of too-big-to-fail institutions? 
 
10. In preventing and containing a future crisis, what would be the positive and negative 
aspects of current regulations requiring a Resolution Plan and limiting government’s 
power to bail out a financial institution under the OLA, and how will they change 
government’s approach in responding to the crisis? 
2.  Bailout of AIG before T ARP 
Troubles at AIG 
By 2005, AIG was one of the largest and most complex financial firms in the world.  At its 
peak, AIG had more than $1 trillion in assets, and was the largest provider of conventional 
insurance in the world, with approximately $75 million individual and corporate customers 
in over 130 countries. Those insurance activities were organized in  separate subsidiaries 
that were regulated and supervised independently by state and foreign regulators (COP 
2010).  
In addition to its insurance business, the parent holding company, AIG Group, Inc., was 
largely unregulated and engaged in a broad range of  financial activities that went well 
beyond the business of life insurance and property and casualty insurance. However, the 
holding company’s regulator, the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) did not take on a 
36
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
comprehensive approach to AIG holding company ’s operations and its influence on all of 
AIG’s business, but rather focused on ensuring that the overall holding company’s business 
did no harm to its thrift subsidiary. The FRBNY and Treasury now acts as AIG’s de facto 
regulators (Ibid., 2010). 
AIG’s bus iness was largely interlocked. For example, AIG’s securities lending operations 
involved securities pooled from AIG’s life insurance subsidiaries. Despite such complex 
features of the business and such a wide range and large number of counterparties exposed 
to AIG business, fragmented oversight by various limited regulators enabled certain key 
businesses to go unregulated. AIG’s Financial Products subsidiary (AIGFP) was one of such 
example. AIGFP had expanded rapidly into some of the newest, riskiest, and m ost complex 
parts of the financial system, using the holding company’s strong credit rating, which was 
based on the insurance subsidiaries. AIGFP became one of the largest providers of credit 
default swaps (CDSs) on collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) b acked by subprime 
mortgages. CDSs are essentially insurance against defaulting collaterals of CDOs. Despite the 
size of this business , CDSs fell outside of the scope of various regulators overseeing AIG 
operations. Former Acting OTS director Scott M. Plako ff acknowledged that “OTS did not 
foresee the extent of risk concentration and profound systemic impact CDS caused within 
AIG” (Ibid., 2010).  
Figure 1 shows AIG’s aggregate revenues generated during 2004 -06 by its business 
segments and region. Figure 2 su mmarizes the primary operations of AIG business and 
applicable domestic regulatory bodies for each operation in 2008.  
Figure 1: Aggregate Revenue by Segment and by Geographic Region in 2004-2006 
 
Source: American International Group, Inc., Form 10-K for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 
2006, and Form 10-K for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2004. 
37
Haircuts and Resolutions Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2: AIG Primary Business Segments  
General Insurance Life Insurance & 
Retirement Services Financial Services Asset Management 
Property/casualty 
insurance 
Commercial/industrial 
insurance 
Special insurance and 
reinsurance 
 
Individual and group 
life insurance 
Retirement services 
Annuities 
Capital markets 
Consumer finance 
Insurance premium 
finance 
Aircraft leasing 
Investment 
advisory 
Brokerage 
Private banking  
Key Regulators 
50 state insurance 
regulators 
50 state insurance 
regulators 
OTS 
Securities Exchange 
Commission (SEC) 
SEC 
Source: The AIG Rescue, Its Impact on Markets, and the Government’s Exit Strategy, June 
Oversight Report, Congressional Oversight Panel, June 10, 2010. 
 
 
The primary cause of AIG’s liquidity crisis came from AIGFP. AIGFP recognized $11.1 billion 
in unrealized market valuation losses on its CDS contracts for the fourth quarter of 2007, and 
the head of that business would resign. In late June 2008, it recognized $13.5 billion in 
unrealized losses against its residential mortgage backed securities and other structured 
securities investments. In July, then -Chairman of AIG b oard Robert Willumstad spoke to 
then-president of FRBNY Timothy Geithner about the possibility of accessing the Federal 
Reserve’s Discount Window. AIG continued its efforts to address the liquidity problem but 
the efforts fell short. Its problems were now placed in the midst of the broader context of the 
unfolding financial crisis, such as troubles and interventions in Bear Ste arns, Countrywide 
Financial Corporations, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, Merrill Lynch,  the Reserve Fund, and 
the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. AIG was unable to obtain short -term or long -term 
financing in the public -debt markets, and with its inability to roll over commercial paper 
coming due, AIG’s solvency was under immediate threat (Ibid., 2010). 
On September 12, 2008, AIG officials informed the Federal Reserve, the Treasury , and the 
New York State insurance regulators of its fatal liquidity problems. However, the 
government was preoccupied in dealing with the problems at Lehman Brothers, and on the 
morning of September 15, Lehman Brothers announced that it was filing for bankruptcy. At 
this point the focus of top government officials turned to AIG (Ibid., 2010).  
On the same day Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy, a private sector bailout was 
discussed for AIG in a meeting held by the FRBNY, but there was a sense among the bankers 
assembled that AIG’s problems were “too big for the private -sector banks, especially within 
38
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
a limited timeframe created by AIG’s swift descent and the prevailing economic conditions” 
(Ibid., 2010). Two reasons as to why the private-sector rescue effort collapsed were given to 
the government officials: (i) the banks could not establish with any precision what AIG’s 
liquidity needs were, and (ii) after the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy, the combination of 
AIG’s rising liquidity needs and increased concern about capital preservation by large 
financial institutions caused them to pull back on their willingness to participate (Secretary 
Testimony 2010).  
On September 16, 2008, the Federal Reserve authorized the FRBNY to initially extend a line 
of credit of $85 billion to AIG. The Federal Reserve stated at the time that its goal was to 
provide AIG with sufficient liquidity to meet its obligations and to allow for the orderly 
disposition of certain A IG businesses. (FRBNY is owned by its member banks and not the 
federal government, but it routinely acts as an agent of the Federal Reserve in financial 
market transactions.) The term sheet that the private-sector banks had developed during the 
private bailout discussion became the template for the AIG rescue package that the FRBNY 
proceeded to put together. FRBNY admitted that it came up with the $85 billion amount by 
simply taking the private sector’s $75 billion term sheet and adding $10 billion as a cushion. 
This cushion was added in anticipation of looming liquidity concerns, and because the 
Federal Reserve did not want to have to increase the line of credit at a later date6 (COP 2010). 
The Federal Reserve had no role in supervising or regulating AIG, but it was the only 
governmental entity at the time with the legal authority to provide liquidity to the financial 
system in emergency and exigent circumstances. Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act 
provided that the Federal Reserve Board “may authoriz e any Federal reserve bank . . . to 
discount . . . notes, drafts, and bills of exchange” for “any individual, partnership, or 
corporation” if three conditions are met. First, the Board of Governors must determine that 
“unusual and exigent” circumstances ex ist by the affirmative vote of at least five members. 
Second, the notes, drafts, and bills of exchange must be secured to the satisfaction of the 
Federal Reserve bank. Third, the Federal Reserve bank must determine that the person or 
institution involved cannot secure adequate credit from other banking institutions.  
It is worth noting that the Dodd -Frank Act now amends this section ensuring that any 
Federal Reserve emergency lending program or facility is for the purpose of providing 
liquidity to the finan cial system and not to aid an individual failing financial company. The 
rescue of AIG was ultimately led by the FRBNY, acting on behalf of the Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve and in close consultation with Treasury. As mentioned previously, 
although the Treasury did not have regulatory authority to intervene nor finance the AIG 
bailout at that time, the Treasury was closely involved in the discussions about the 
appropriate policy response to the unfolding AIG crisis (Ibid., 2010). 
The Treasury was directly involved in discussions of AIG’s conditions and the consequences 
for the financial system of an AIG failure, but it had little if any authority to provide funds to 
AIG at the time. Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA) was not enacted until 
October 3, 2008, and only then  did the Treasury t ake on a greater role in the AIG rescue. 
Similarly, other AIG regulatory bodies, such as state insurance regulators and OTS, possessed 
oversight authority but lacked any legal authority to step in and provide funds and aid to the 
company. 
__________________________________________________________________ 
6 However, the combined commitment and assistance for AIG by the Treasury and the Federal Reserve ended 
up totaling $182 billi on as of March 2009 (Treasury December 2012, available at 
http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/TARP-
Programs/aig/Documents/20121212_AIG_v8.jpg).  
39
Haircuts and Resolutions Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 10 ---
As discussed above, the Federal Reserve Act required that in order for the Federal Reserve 
to use its Section 13(3) authority, AIG needed to come up with sufficient collateral so that 
the lending by the Federal Rese rve was secured to its satisfaction. In addition to this 
collateral, U.S. taxpayers received a 79.9% ownership stake in AIG. The FRBNY officials said 
that the government took this 79.9% ownership stake because it believed the taxpayer 
should receive the same terms and conditions that the private sector banks wanted in their 
bailout consortium term sheet (Ibid., 2010). 
Additionally, the government’s offer required AIG's CEO to step down. Immediately after AIG 
agreed, the government began the process of chang ing the Board of Directors. According to 
the report by the Congressional Oversight Panel (COP), in designing the intervention, the 
government made sure that there were appropriately tough conditions that put the burden 
of failure on AIG's existing equity h olders and management, and started the process of 
designing a comprehensive restructuring plan (Ibid., 2010). 
Unfortunately, by September 30, 2008, 14 days after the approval of $85 billion, AIG had 
already drawn down approximately $61 billion of that mone y and in October the Federal 
Reserve Board approved additional lending by the FRBNY (Ibid ., 2010). Prior to the AIG 
bailout, no such lending to non-depository institutions had occurred since the 1930s relying 
on Section 13(3) (Ibid., 2010). As of March 2009, AIG had received $182 billion in total from 
the Treasury and the Federal Reserve. On January 14, 2011, the FRBNY's assistance to AIG 
was terminated and its loans to AIG fully repaid. 
Government’s Rationale and Criticisms on the Bailout  
When testifying about  the AIG bailout in 2010, the Federal Reserve, the FRBNY, and the 
Treasury described their choice as “binary,” either allowing AIG to file for bankruptcy or 
providing it with liquidity (Ibid ., 2010). They were concerned by the complexity an d 
uncertainty of a potential bankruptcy procedure for AIG due to interconnected segments of 
different businesses. If AIG had filed for bankruptcy, (i) it constituted an event of default for 
AIG’s various derivative contracts that could have technically sto pped collateral calls by 
counterparties but would have resulted in loss of trust in AIG business , and these 
counterparties were not subject to automatic stay under bankruptcy law; and (ii) the 
bankruptcy court would not have had jurisdiction over AIG’s insurance subsidiaries or other 
foreign subsidiaries without a sufficient connection to the United States, and this removed a 
substantial number of AIG’s businesses from the purview of the bankruptcy court (Ibid ., 
2010). 
Not only was the complexity and uncert ainty of a bankruptcy procedure a concern, but the 
Federal Reserve and the Treasury also reasoned that AIG’s failure would pose a systemic risk 
since (i) AIG was a major provider of credit default swaps on CDOs, an AIG failure could have 
exposed its counterparties to large losses and disrupted the operation of the payments and 
settlements system as a whole, and defaults on over $100 billion of debt and on trillions of 
dollars of derivatives would have adversely impacted numerous financial institutions and 
the financial system as a whole, negatively affecting investor confidence and further 
destabilizing the economy; (ii) AIG’s default could have triggered severe disruptions to an 
already distressed commercial paper market adversely impacting money market mut ual 
funds since AIG had issued $20 billion in commercial paper to money market mutual funds, 
approximately four times as much as Lehman Brothers; (iii) there was fear that AIG’s failure 
could undermine an already fragile economy by weakening business and investor confidence 
(Secretary Testimony 2010). The government was also unclear how a bankruptcy filing by 
AIG would have impacted the company’s many counterparties or the financial system as a 
whole (COP 2010).  
40
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
Further in distinguishing AIG’s situation fr om Lehman Brothers, the Federal Reserve’s 
Chairman Bernanke testified at a congressional hearing that “the troubles at Lehman had 
been well known for some time, and investors clearly recognized…that the failure of the firm 
was a significant possibility. Thus, we judged that investors and counterparties had had time 
to take precautionary measures.” On the other hand, he explained that since nobody knew 
the exposure of specific banks to AIG at that time, “confidence in the entire banking system 
would have plummeted, putting the whole system at risk” (FCIC August 31, 2010).  
The Federal Reserve Board determined that, in the then-existing environment, “a disorderly 
failure of AIG could add to already significant levels of financial market fragility and lead to 
substantially higher borrowing costs, reduced household wealth, and materially weaker 
economic performance.” Chairman Bernanke said the Federal Reserve’s decision -making 
was driven by the “prevailing market conditions and the size and composition of AIG’s 
obligations,” as well as “AIG’s central role in a number of markets other firms use to manage 
risks, and the size and composition of AIG’s balance sheet.” He also stressed that an AIG 
failure would have also had detrimental impacts on market confidence in o ther areas, 
including state and local governments that invested with AIG, retirement plans that 
purchased insurance from AIG, and banks that extended loans and credit lines to the 
company (COP 2010).  
Former Treasury Secretary Paulson testified that “if AI G had gone down, … we would have 
had a situation where Main Street companies, industrial companies of all sizes, would not 
have been able to raise money for their basic funding. And they wouldn’t have been able to 
pay their employees. They would have had t o let them go. Employees wouldn’t have paid 
their bills. This would have rippled through the economy.” Furthermore, he added that had 
AIG failed, he believes that it “would have taken down the whole financial system and our 
economy. It would have been a disaster” (Ibid., 2010). 
Former Treasury Secretary Geithner testified that the team [the Federal Reserve, the 
Treasury, and the New York State Insurance Department] “concluded that AIG’s failure 
would be catastrophic. AIG was much larger than Lehman, it was spread across more 
countries than Lehman, and while it posed many of the same basic risks as Lehman, they 
were actually greater because of AIG’s role as an insurance company.” He pointed out that 
history suggests that the withdrawal of a major underwriter from a particular market can 
have large, long-lasting effects on the households and businesses that rely on basic insurance 
protection (Secretary Testimony 2010).  
Regardless of various testimonies by the government officials, a report by the COP in 2010 
points out that the focus of the government’s systemic risk justification changed over time. 
In September 2008, neither the Federal Reserve nor the Treasury publicly expressed specific 
concern about the effect of bankruptcy at AIG on existing insurance poli cyholders. AIG’s 
insurance operations were viewed as generally sound, and it was only after the initial 
extension of line of credit by NYFRB that the Federal Reserve and Treasury began to voice 
concerns about the desire to preserve value at the insurance c ompany subsidiary level and 
the consequences of the unraveling of AIG’s insurance subsidiaries on households and 
businesses. Beginning in March 2009, the government publicly raised concerns that a sudden 
loss of AIG’s insurance capacity could have severely  disrupted the market, potentially 
creating a market capacity shortage and significant premium increases for consumers, 
businesses, and financial institutions. The report also states that, to some extent, at least 
some of the government’s justifications se em to have pivoted over time into a political 
argument with less factual support regarding the impact of an AIG failure on the insurance 
subsidiaries, retail sectors, and policyholders (COP 2010).  
41
Haircuts and Resolutions Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 12 ---
The same report also criticized that if AIG had sought bankruptcy protection and the 
government had become the debtor -in-possession (DIP) lender, it would have been in a 
powerful position to reorganize AIG’s business and obligations and terminate commercial 
contracts. It did not do so, however, and that  choice had significant consequences in two 
respects: (i) the government could no longer condition financial assistance on the 
willingness of AIG’s creditors to accept discounts or other losses in performing under or 
closing out their contracts with AIG, and as a result all creditors were paid in full, and (ii) the 
government was not immediately able to reorganize any aspect of AIG’s business and some 
of the government cash ended up in the hands of counterparties (third of the AIG’s revenue 
is derived from East Asia; i.e. insurance companies in East Asia) that the American public 
might not have supported assisting (Ibid., 2010).  
Additionally, the report found a lack of complete transparency at the time of the initial 
government intervention indicated that t he government failed to follow a consistent and 
cohesive message with respect to its rationale for assisting AIG, calling into question the 
factors that were actually driving the decision -making at the various points in time that 
assistance was offered and restructured. It questioned whether the options for AIG problem 
were as binary as the government thought, and suggested that there may have been many 
options the FRBNY evidently did not consider, including a combined private/public rescue 
(which would hav e maintained some market discipline), a loan conditioned on 
counterparties granting concessions, and a short -term bridge loan from the FRBNY to 
provide AIG time for longer-term restructuring. Rather, providing a full government rescue 
with no shared sacrif ice among the creditors of AIG, reinforced moral hazard , undermined 
the basic tenets of capitalism, and dramatically added to the public’s sense of a double 
standard between large and smaller financial institutions. According to the FRBNY, a hybrid 
of private-public approach was not considered because “[t]here was no time” and it was also 
felt that “that could be counterproductive, given what we were seeing in the markets at the 
time” (Ibid., 2010). 
3. Resolution of WaMu 
Before its collapse, WaMu was the largest U.S. thrift and one of the ten largest U.S. depository 
institutions, with over $300 billion of assets. Its collapse was the largest bank failure in U.S. 
history (FCIC August 31, 2010). After the mortgage market meltdown in mid-2007, however, 
WaMu suffered large losses from its investment in risky products —especially in subprime 
and Alt -A residential mortgages — and liberal underwriting. In the third quarter of 2007, 
WaMu was still profitable, but earnings were 73% less than the second quarter because  of 
losses from its loan. During the fourth quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of 2008, WaMu 
suffered consecutive $1 billion quarterly losses. WaMu’s liquidity position improved 
temporarily in April 2008 through a $7 billion investment in WaMu’s holding  company by a 
consortium led by the Texas Pacific Group (OIG 2010).  
However, with the failure of IndyMac in July 2008, WaMu’s liquidity was further stressed as 
WaMu encountered significant deposit withdrawals and the Federal Home Loan Bank of San 
Francisco began to limit WaMu’s borrowing capacity. WaMu began to offer deposit rates in 
excess of competitors, in order to improve liquidity. With the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
on September 15, 2008, however, WaMu incurred net deposit outflow of $16.7 billion, 
creating a liquidity crisis for the institution. WaMu’s ability to raise funds was hindered by 
its borrowing capacity limits, share price decline, portfolio losses, and an anti-dilution clause 
tied to the $7 billion capital investment (Ibid., 2010). 
42
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
On September 25, 2008, OTS closed WaMu and appointed the FDIC as its receiver. The FDIC 
sold WaMu to JPMorgan, and through this purchase JPMorgan acquired WaMu’s assets, 
assumed the qualified financial contracts and made a payment of $1.9 billion. Qualified 
financial contracts included swaps, options, futures, forwards, repurchase agreements , and 
any other qualified financial contract as defined in 12 U.S.C. Section 1821(e)(8)(D). 
Additionally, all depositors of WaMu were fully protected. In announcing WaMu’s sale, FDIC 
Chairman Bair stated that “For all depositors and other customers of Washington Mutual 
Bank, this is simply a combination of two banks,” and that “WaMu ’s balance sheet and the 
payment paid by JPMorgan Chase allowed a transaction in which neither th e uninsured 
depositors nor the insurance fund absorbed any losses” (FDIC Press Release 2008). Certain 
liabilities of WaMu, such as preferred stock, common stock, subordinated debt , and senior 
debt, on the other hand, were left in FDIC’s receivership and sh ared the losses of WaMu’s 
resolution (Schedule 2.1, Purchase and Assumption Agreement 2008). 
The FDIC finally decided that using FDIC funds to protect unsecured creditors of WaMu Bank 
was not appropriate (FCIC 2011). In fact, neither the Federal Reseve nor Treasury took 
action, as would be required under the FDI Act, to pursue a systemic risk exce ption to the 
least costly requirement for WaMu. Wachovia and the FDI Act will be discussed further in 
the next section. In an inquiry by the FCIC in 2010, FDIC stated that it considered whether a 
systemic risk determination was appropriate in the case of W aMu, and ultimately, because 
an orderly least -cost resolution was feasible for the institution, such a determination was 
not needed for WaMu (FCIC Follow-Up Questions 2010).  
FDIC Chairman Sheila Bair told the FCIC that “I absolutely do think that was the right 
decision. WaMu was not a well -run institution,” and characterized the resolution of WaMu 
as “successful.” Fed General Counsel Scott Alvarez told the FCIC that he agreed with Bair that 
“there should not have been intervention in WaMu. ” On the other ha nd, Treasury's Neel 
Kashkari told the FCIC that “… in my judgment that was a mistake. . . . [A]t that time, the 
economy was in such a perilous state, it  [not intervening in WaMu] was like playing with 
fire.” 
4. Saving Wachovia 
In early September 2008, the  FDIC became increasingly concerned with the liquidity 
condition of Wachovia, which was experiencing difficulties due to mortgage market 
meltdown around the same time as WaMu. Its structured finance business was holding a 
considerable volume of subprime mo rtgages, syndicated credits with collateralized loan 
obligations, and commercial real estate credits, which were acquired or originated for 
inclusion in commercial mortgage -backed securitizations. Due to market conditions, these 
assets could not be easily sold. In addition to becoming illiquid, they also experienced 
increasing credit-quality problems, resulting in large mark-to-market valuation adjustments 
reflecting increased credit risk and higher liquidity premiums for the assets. 
Following the bankruptc y of Lehman Brothers, Wachovia experienced significant deposit 
outflows totaling approximately $8.3 billion. Liquidity pressures on Wachovia increased 
when two regular Wachovia counterparties declined make a loan. Meanwhile, deposit 
outflows accelerated, $ 1.1 billion in asset -backed commercial paper and tri -party 
repurchase agreements could not be rolled over, and $3.2 billion in contingent funding was 
required on variable rate demand notes. On September 25, 2008, Wachovia management 
informed bank regulator s that it was facing a near -term liquidity crisis (Corston 2010). A 
report by the FCIC in 2011 views the run on Wachovia as a “silent run” by uninsured 
43
Haircuts and Resolutions Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 14 ---
depositors and unsecured creditors sitting in front of their computers, rather than by 
depositors standing in lines outside bank doors (FCIC 2011). 
On September 26, 2008, a day after WaMu’s closure, the FDIC invoked a systemic risk 
exception for Wachovia based on the FDIC Act. The FDIC Act mandates the FDIC to take the 
least-cost and prompt resolution approach when dealing with failing depository institutions. 
However, if both the FDIC Board and the Federal Reserve Board, by a vote of at least two -
thirds of their members and the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the President, 
determine that the compliance with the least-cost requirement “would have serious adverse 
effect on economic conditions or financial stability” and that action or assistance other than 
the least-costly method would “avoid or mitigate such adverse effects,” the FDIC can bypass 
the least -cost course of action. This was the FDIC’s first exercise of the systemic risk 
exception since the establishment of the FDIC Act (Minutes of FDIC Meeting 2008). 
In the meantime, Citigroup, Inc., and Wells Fargo performed due diligence in an at tempt to 
acquire Wachovia in a private transaction, however, neither were able to reach definitive 
agreements. The FDIC entered into negotiations with Citigroup and Wells Fargo on 
September 28, 2008, and both banks submitted open bank assistance bids, but only the 
Citigroup proposal resulted in serious negotiations. The next day the FDIC announced 
Citigroup’s plan to acquire Wachovia’s assets and liabilities, including five depository 
institutions and assume senior and subordinated debt of Wachovia. The FDIC and Citigroup 
entered into a loss sharing arrangement on a pre -identified pool of loans. Under the 
agreement, Citigroup was to absorb up to $42 billion of losses on a $312 billion pool of loans, 
and the FDIC was to absorb losses beyond that. Citigroup in  exchange granted the FDIC $12 
billion in preferred stock and warrants to compensate the FDIC for bearing this risk (FCIC 
August 31, 2010). 
The FDIC Staff recommended in its memo that the Board accept the bid of Citigroup, Inc., as 
“the least costly availa ble method of dealing with the systemic risk” Wachovia imposed. 
Based on preliminary information, the staff estimated no loss to the Deposit Insurance Fund 
(FDIC Staff Memo 2008). Chairman Bair provided comfort that the FDIC’s funds would not 
suffer a loss from the Wachovia transaction. The Department of the Treasury already agreed 
that, if there are any losses from the Wachovia transaction, the Treasury would separately 
fund those so that the FDIC’s cash balance would not be depleted in any way. This was i n 
contrast to the Treasury’s usual rule that the FDIC must spend down its entire cash balance 
before it can borrow from the Treasury (Minutes of FDIC Meeting 2008). 
However, in early October Wells Fargo presented a sweeter deal to Wachovia that did not 
require either an FDIC receivership or any FDIC assistance. After a review by Wachovia’s 
Board, Wachovia’s directors and shareholders approved the Wells Fargo transaction (FCIC 
August 31, 2010). The new Wells Fargo transaction took place immediately after a change in 
federal tax regulation to encourage bank mergers took effect. Companies were allowed to 
shelter profits from taxation based on their past losses, but when a profitable company 
bought a company with losses, regulation historically limited the profi table company’s 
ability to shelter its income based on the acquired company’s losses. The change in tax 
regulation specifically removed this limit on the income banks can shelter based on the 
losses of acquired companies. 
Citigroup officially walked away from the Wachovia transaction on October 9, 2008 , ending 
talks with Wells Fargo on the matter (Citigroup 2008). Citigroup commenced a lawsuit 
against Wells Fargo to recover damages for breach of contract and tortious interference with 
contract, and in 2010 the lawsuit was settled as Wells Fargo agreed to pay $100 million to 
resolve all claims related to the dispute (NY Times 2010).  
44
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
Rationale behind Different Decisions for WaMu and Wachovia 
The FDIC Staff Memo recommended that the FDIC Board invoke systemic risk exception. This 
memo was based extensively on the financial and market analyses prepared by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond (FCIC Report at 369). The FDIC and Federal Reserve analyses 
viewed that Wachovia’s  failure would “seriously and nega tively affect already disrupted 
credit markets,” including short -term interbank lending, counterparty relationships in 
qualified financial contract markets and bank senior and subordinated debt markets, and 
would further “disrupt the related markets in der ivative products and other markets.” The 
memo also notes that Wachovia was the fourth-largest commercial bank in the U.S., and with 
the term funding markets already being under considerable stress for more than a year, and 
the pressure rising greatly follo wing the failure of Lehman Brothers, the difficulties at AIG 
and the closing of WaMu, “a least-cost resolution of Wachovia Bank NA with no assistance to 
creditors and the potential for meaningful losses imposed on the Bank’s debt would be 
expected to have significant systemic consequences.” It feared that a default by Wachovia 
and a partial payout to debtors of Wachovia would intensify liquidity pressures on other U.S. 
banks, which were extremely vulnerable to a loss of confidence by wholesale suppliers of 
funds. Moreover, it warned that Wachovia’s failure could also lead investors to reassess the 
risk in U.S. commercial banks more broadly, causing a bank run (FDIC Staff Memo 2008). 
As seen in the minutes of the FDIC Board meeting held to take a vote for inv oking the 
systemic risk of Wachovia, the Board was cautious in weighing the options provided by the 
staff memo. Vice Chairman Gruenberg acknowledged that “the staff proposal was the best of 
a set of undesirable options,” but also noted that approving the p roposal would be an 
appropriate action in the face of extraordinary times. Chairman Bair agreed with Vice 
Chairman Gruenberg that the staff proposal was one of several not -very-good options. She, 
however, noted “the importance of the fact that the Board of  Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System and the Department of the Treasury had acted quickly to find a systemic risk 
exception,” and observed “how important that outcome was to the Office of the Comptroller 
of the Currency.” She said that she “acquiesced in the systemic risk exception decision” based 
on the input of her colleagues and the fact that the FDIC Act gives multiple decision makers 
a say in this process. Regardless she noted that she was not completely comfortable with that 
decision, but as the m arket changed quickly they were under a time restraint to move 
forward with it (Minutes of FDIC Meeting 2008). 
The Federal Reserve and the Treasury were more aggressive in arguing for the systemic risk 
Wachovia posed in the market. The Federal Reserve’s an alysis focused on the firm’s 
counterparties and other “interdependencies” with large market participants, and stated 
that asset sales by mutual funds could cause short -term funding markets to “virtually shut 
down.” In addition, the Federal Reserve staff ar gued that a Wachovia failure would cause 
banks to “become even less willing to lend to businesses and households. . . . [T]hese effects 
would contribute to weaker economic performance, higher unemployment, and reduced 
wealth.” Secretary Paulson had recused  himself from the decision because of his ties to 
Robert Steel, but other members of Treasury had “vigorously advocated” saving Wachovia 
(FCIC 2011).  
As seen above, Bair was reluctant. To win the approval of Chairman Bair and John Reich (the 
OTS director who served on the FDIC board), the Treasury ultimately agreed to take the 
unusual step of funding all FDIC’s losses from the proposed transaction. Without this express 
commitment from the Treasury, the FDIC would have been the first to bear losses out of i ts 
Deposit Insurance Fund. Normally, help would have come from Treasury only after that fund 
was depleted. In the minutes of the FDIC meeting, Chairman Bair stated it was “especially 
important” that the Treasury agreed to fund the losses, given that “it ha s vigorously 
advocated the transaction” (FCIC 2011; Minutes of FDIC Meeting 2008). 
45
Haircuts and Resolutions Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 16 ---
Some, in arguing for the FDIC to step in for Wachovia, attempted to connect WaMu’s closure 
with Wachovia’s problems. In a report by the FCIC, the Federal Reserve's General C ounsel 
Scott Alvarez stated that WaMu’s failure “raised creditor concern about the health of 
Wachovia,” and “[t]he day after the failure of WaMu, Wachovia Bank depositors accelerated 
the withdrawal of significant amounts from their accounts. . . . In addit ion, wholesale funds 
providers withdrew liquidity support from Wachovia. It appeared likely that Wachovia 
would soon become unable to fund its operations.” David Wilson, the Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency’s lead examiner at Wachovia, agreed with this view. “The whole 
world changed” for Wachovia after WaMu’s failure, he said (FCIC 2011). 
However, this connection is doubted by others. Chairman Bair, in her 2012 book, explains 
that the facts at that time do not support those arguments.  
[the argument for connecting WaMu’s failure with Wachovia’s troubles] pointed to 
the fact that the stock market had fallen precipitously on Monday, four days after we 
closed WaMu. But that had been in reaction to Congress’s failure to pass the TARP 
legislation, not th e WaMu closing, as contemporaneous market analysis clearly 
demonstrated. If there was a relationship between WaMu’s failure and Wachovia’s 
problems, it had nothing to do with the fact that WaMu’s bondholders had taken 
losses; it was because Wachovia had th e same type of exposure to toxic loans on the 
West Coast that had brought WaMu down (Bair 2012).  
She also told the FCIC that WaMu’s failure “was practically a nonevent,” and “It was below 
the fold if it was even on the front page . . . barely a blip given everything else that was going 
on”(FCIC 2011). “It was the fog of war,” Chairman Bair told the FCIC. “The system was highly 
unstable. Who was going to take the chance that Wachovia would have a depository run on 
Monday?” (FCIC 2011). Figure 3 summari zes the different rationale provided by John 
Corston and Sheila Bair of the FDIC in explaining FDIC’s response for each  of WaMu and 
Wachovia.   
  
46
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 3: Different Backgrounds in WaMu and Wachovia’s Failure 
WaMu Wachovia 
$300 billion in assets. 
Simpler structure with focus on mortgage 
lending. 
$780 billion in assets. 
More complex structure with foreign deposits 
and major holding company subsidiaries 
involved in significant financial services.  
The FDIC had enough time and resources to 
analyze the financial conditions of WaMu, 
develop strategies (orderly resolution plan) , 
and understand the risks involved with those 
strategies. 
The FDIC only had short time frame for 
developing a resolution strategy and soliciting 
acquirer bids, and the F DIC was unsure what 
systemic risks resolution of Wachovia would 
entail. 
Source: Statement of John Corston and Sheila C. Bair, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
on Systemically Important Institutions and the Issue of "Too Big To Fail" before the Financial 
Crisis Inquiry Commission. 
5. Resolutions Plans and Orderly Liquidation Authority  
Resolution Plans 
Effective as of November 30, 2011, the Federal Reserve and the FDIC implemented a 
requirement under the Dodd -Frank Act regarding resolution plans  for certain large or 
significant financial institutions (SIFIs) 7. The rule requires SIFIs selected by the Financial 
Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) for supervision by the Federal Reserve Board and bank 
holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more to periodically 
submit a plan to the Federal Reserve, the FDIC , and the FSOC for the company’s rapid and 
orderly resolution in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. The 
rule also requires that the company report on the nature and extent of its credit exposure to 
significant bank holding companies8 and other SIFIs, and their credit exposure to itself.  
The Final Rule explains that the purpose of this requirement is to promote financial stability 
by (i) al lowing the FDIC to plan the exercise of its resolution authority since it will have a 
better understanding of the institutions’ structure, complexity, and resolution plan and 
__________________________________________________________________ 
7 Nonbank SIFIs, a  “significant nonbank  financial company” means : (1) Any nonbank financial  company 
supervised by the Board; and (2) Any other nonbank financial company that had $50 billion  or more in total 
consolidated assets (a s determined in accordance with  applicable accounting standards) as o f the end of its 
most recently completed fiscal year. Section 242.4(a), Title I of the Dodd-Frank Act. 
8 A “significant bank holding company” means any bank holding com pany or company that is, or is treated in 
the United States as, a bank holding company, that had $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets as of the 
end of the most recently completed calendar year, as  reported on either the Federal  Reserve’s FR Y -9C 
(Consolidated Financial Statement for Bank Holding Companies), or any successor form thereto, or the Federal 
Reserve’s Form FR Y-7Q (Capital and Asset Report for Foreign Banking  Organizations), or any successor form 
thereto. Section 242.4(b), Title I of the Dodd-Frank Act. 
 
47
Haircuts and Resolutions Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 18 ---
process; (ii) assisting the Federal Reserve’s supervisory efforts to ensure that the 
institution’s operations are not posing a risk to financial stability; and (iii) enabling better 
coordinated resolution strategy through enhanced understanding of foreign banks ’ 
operations in the U.S.  
Orderly Liquidation Authority 
Additionally, Title II of the Dodd -Frank Act creates the OLA, a new insolvency regime for 
SIFIs including broker -dealers that have the potential to pose systemic risks to the U.S. 
economy. The FDIC is appointed as a receiver to liquidate and wind up the company. In order 
to determine whether a financial company is to be placed under Title II, the Secretary of the 
Treasury basically looks at (i) whether the financial company is in default or in danger of 
default, (ii) whether the potential default would have adverse effect on the financial stability 
of the U.S., and (iii) whether taking emergency action as provided for in the law would avoid 
or mitigate those adverse effects. It also considers any viable private sector alternatives, and 
the effects of placing the company under the OLA may have on the general fund of the 
Treasury, and the creditors, counterparties, and shareholders in the failing company. After 
considering all the above factors, if it is believed to be the best to appoint the FDIC as a 
receiver, the FDIC will take control of the assets, obligations, and operations of the company.   
The FDIC’s duties as a receiver include transferring or selling assets, creating bridge financial 
organizations that can help assume assets or liabilities duri ng the liquidation process, and 
approving valid claims against the company that will need to be paid. The FDIC may avoid or 
invalidate certain prior transfers, agreements, leases, or compensation to executives that 
hinder the ability of the FDIC to carry out its duties. The Orderly Liquidation Fund is created 
by the Treasury to cover the administrative costs of liquidation for companies under Title II.  
Claims under the OLA are paid in the following order: (1) administrative costs; (2) the 
government; (3) w ages, salaries, or commissions of employees; (4) contributions to 
employee benefit plans; (5) any other general or senior liability of the company; (6) any 
junior obligation; (7) salaries of executives and directors of the company; and (8) obligations 
to shareholders, members, general partners, and other equity holders. The OLA also allows 
the FDIC to recover from any current or former senior executive or director substantially 
responsible for the failed condition of the financial company any compensation r eceived 
during the two-year period preceding the date on which the FDIC was appointed as the 
receiver. Moreover, in the case of fraud, the two-year time limit does not apply. Another 
important provision of the Title II is the ban on using taxpayer funds to preserve a company 
under the OLA.  
The Treasury noted in a press release that the OLA was to close the regulatory gap seen in 
dealing with SIFIs. The two examples —Lehman Brothers ’ failure and AIG’s government 
bailout—demonstrate this gap. It was expected that the OLA would allow the government to 
administer its effective, orderly reorganization or wind -down, and enable the government 
to reduce the need for taxpayer funds, instead of subjecting a SIFI to bankruptcy or injecting 
taxpayers' funds with no real control. Ultimately, the OLA was expected to mitigate systemic 
risk and enhance consumer and investor protection. 
References 
12 USC Sections 5381-94, 12 U.S. Code Chapter 53, Subchapter II - ORDERLY LIQUIDATION 
AUTHORITY 
48
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
The AIG Rescue, Its Impact on Mark ets, and the Government’s Exit Strategy , Congressional 
Oversight Panel, June 10, 2010  
Bair, Sheila. Bull by the Horns: Fighting to Save Main Street from Wall Street and Wall Street 
from Itself (2012) 
Citi Ends Negotiation with Wells Fargo on Wachovia Transaction, Press Release, Citigroup 
Inc., October 9, 2008  
Citigroup Inc. to Acquire Banking Operations of Wachovia, FDIC, Federal Reserve and 
Treasury Agree to Provide Open Bank Assistance to Protect Depositors , Press 
Release, September 29, 2008  
Evaluation of Federal Regulatory Oversight of Washington Mutual Bank  (Report No. EVAL-
10-002), Offices of Inspector General, April 9, 2010  
FDIC Board of Directors Meeting Transcript, September 29, 2008  
FDIC Staff Memo to the Board of Directors, September 29, 2008  
Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the 
Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States, Financial Crisis Inquiry 
Commission, January 2011  
Follow-Up Questions to the Financial Crisis I nquiry Commission Hearing on September 2, 
2010, October 28, 2010  
JPMorgan Chase Acquires Banking Operations of Washington Mutual, FDIC Facilitates 
Transaction that Protects All Depositors and Comes at No Cost to the Deposit 
Insurance Fund, FDIC Press Release, September 25, 2008  
Minutes of the Meeting of the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, September 29, 2008  
Preliminary Staff Report: Governmental Rescues of “Too-Big-To-Fail” Financial Institutions, 
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, August 31, 2010  
Purchase and Assumption Agreement among FDIC and JPMorgan Chase Bank, September 25, 
2008  
Resolution Plans Required, 12 CFR Part 243 & 381, Federal Register Vol 76, No 211, 
November 1, 2011 
Rhee, June and  Andrew Metrick, U.S. Guarantee During the Global Financial Crisis, Yale 
Program on Financial Stability Case Study Case Number 2015-3A-v1, [Date]. 
Secretary Written Testimony before the House Committee on Oversight and Government 
Reform, U.S. Department of Treasury, Press Releases, January 27, 2010   
Statement of John Corston, Acting Deputy Director, Complex Financial Institution Branch, 
Division of Supervision and Consumer Protection, Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation on Systemically Important Institutions and the Issue of "Too Big To Fail" 
before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, September 1, 2010  
49
Haircuts and Resolutions Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 20 ---
Statement of Sheila C. Bair, Chairman, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on 
Systemically Important Institutions and the Issue of "Too Big to Fail " before the 
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, September 2, 2010  
Treasury Proposes Legislation for Resolution Authority , Press Release, U.S. Department of 
Treasury, March 25, 2009  
Wachovia Chooses Wells Fargo, Spurns Citi, The Wall Street Journal, October 4, 2008  
Wells Fargo Pays Citi $100 Million for Wachovia Claims, The New York Times, November 19, 
2010  
 
Development of this case has been supported by a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation to the Yale Program on Financial Stability. 
Copyright 2015, 2020 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material 
or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale 
Program for Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
 
 
50
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1