--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 2 Issue 4 
2020 
Lessons Learned: Phil Angelides Lessons Learned: Phil Angelides 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, 
Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Political Economy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2020) "Lessons Learned: Phil Angelides," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 2 : Iss. 4, 36-39. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1125 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss4/2 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol2/iss4/2

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Phil Angelides 
 
By Sandra Ward 
Phil Angelides chaired the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC) established by Congress 
in the aftermath of the global financial crisis of 2007 -09 with the purpose of understanding 
what precipitated the crisis so that any future crises might be averted. The 10 -member 
bipartisan commission, known as the “Angelides Commission” after its chair, convened in 
September 2010. Meeting in a span of 15 months and holding 19 public hearings and 
interviewing more than 700 people, the commission submitted its findings in January 2011. The 
commission concluded that the crisis was avoidable, the “result of human actions, inactions, 
and misjudgments.” The report included dissenting views from four members , one of whom 
issued an independent dissent. This “Lessons Learned ” is based on an interview with Mr. 
Angelides. 
Never underestimate the extent to which forces opposed to a fact-finding inquiry will 
seek to undermine and discredit it. 
Angelides spoke with much pride regarding the commission’s accomplishments, but he also 
felt compelled to speak about some of the more contentious elements that attended his 
chairmanship. He stated that he, perhaps naively, believed the bipartisan nature of the FCIC 
and its lofty mandate to determine the causes of the global financial crisis (GFC) would lead 
commissioners appointed to the FCIC to put the truth above politics and powerful interests.  
Recalls Angelides, 
One of the greatest disappointments was that given the magnitude of what had 
happened to the country and the importance of setting a foundation of making sure 
this did not happen again, at least in the foreseeable future,  I believed that people 
would come to this commission with the aim of finding the facts and coming to 
conclusions, without regard to politics. It became obvious to me very early on that the 
Republican commissioners were not particularly interested in findi ng common 
ground with the Democratic commissioners in coming up with a unified report.  
It became clear to me there wasn ’t an interest in really finding the facts and arriving 
at fact-based conclusions. Also, it became obvious to me that the financial industry, 
Wall Street, having been the moving force in this tragedy and this debacle for this 
country, was not particularly in terested in doing the critical self -examination about 
what had occurred. They made it clear they were about protecting their position and 
their power versus doing a full and in -depth internal look at what went wrong and 
how the financial system came to the verge of total collapse. 
Angelides also related that “[t]here were very deliberate efforts to undermine my credibility 
and my effectiveness. He related one incident where a financial organization’s counsel called 
the commission’s General Counsel: 
36

--- Page 4 ---
[He] told [Gary] Cohen I was under investigation by the SEC and by the California 
attorney general. He said that I’d hired a lawyer, and had been subpoenaed , and that 
I was subject to an internal investigation both at CalPERS (California Public 
Employees Retirement System) and CalSTRS (California State Teachers’ Retirement 
System) relating to “pay to play.” 
I told my general counsel, false, false, false, false, false, false, 100% false. Zero veracity 
to it at all.  
“This kind of stuff went on all through the yea r, Angelides stated. “It was very difficult, but 
we kept our eyes on the prize.” 
Start with the end in mind and add value: Stick to the facts.  
To preserve the integrity of the FCIC and assure the credibility of its final report, Angelides 
felt it critical to rigorously examine the facts and details of the events and stay above the 
political fray. He notes, 
That was vitally important to do because there were so many political forces: Wall 
Street, for example, and ideologues of different stripes who had views of what 
happened and wanted to conform the facts to those views. It was important to 
undertake an inquiry that at the end of the day could withstand any attacks on its 
veracity. 
The very limited time schedule the FCIC operated under to investigat e and deliver a report 
made it necessary to establish a strategic plan and prioritize what events and institutions it 
would examine, says Angelides.  Driving a lot of the decisions on how best to conduct the 
investigation were budgetary constraints: the FCIC’s $9.8 million budget, increased from $8 
million, paled in comparison to what Wall Street firms were paying law firms to represent 
them in the investigations. 
Of first order, Angelides shared, he and his executive team came to an understanding about 
what they could reasonably d o, given their constraints . They decided that writi ng the 
definitive and accurate history of the crisis was most important: 
[W]hat we then believed was fundamentally important was to get a detailed account 
of what had happened over a period of decades and particularly in the years leading 
up to the crisis. What were the forces? What were the events? What were the activities 
in the financial industry and the actions or inactions of regulators that led to the crisis 
so that we could write the definitive unbiased history of the crisis? Much of our effort 
was focused on, in a sense, doing the investigation, the inquiry, the assembly of facts 
that would allow us to write this factual history, because at the end of the day, wh ile 
people may state different conclusions, what would be irrefutable and immutable is 
what actually happened.  
Once the mission was determined, Angelides explained, “We made a lot of strategic decisions 
about how to best accomplish our mandate within the timeframe and resources we had.”  
37
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
The commission  devised a framework of case studies that explored the role of specific 
institutions, areas within the institutions , and regulatory agencies to see how they might 
have contributed to the crisis. Also, rather than duplicate efforts, the FCIC, according to 
Angelides, decided to accept the findings made by other examiners of certain institutions and 
focus their attention on those that had yet to be thoroughly investigated. Says Angelides, 
We decided that because of our limited time we couldn’t look at every institution. We 
couldn’t look at every nook and cranny of every institution. We couldn’t look at every 
activity that had occurred on Wall Street at large. Instead, we did a series of case 
studies. We looked at a set of specific financial institutions, including AIG, Bear 
Stearns, Citigroup, Countrywide Financial, Fannie Mae, Goldman Sachs, Lehman 
Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Moody’s, and Wachovia. 
Similarly, we looked specifically at a number of regulators, including the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corp, the Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development  (which oversaw affordable 
housing goals), and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to see what actions 
they had taken or not taken that might have contributed to the crisis.  
In terms of staffing, the FCIC took advantage of a common practice in the Federal government 
that allows members of different agencies to be loaned out, or “detailed,” to other agencies. 
In this way, the FCIC gained access to people who were well -schooled in economics and 
financial complexities and could immediately make an impact.  
Fearlessly lay the blame where you find it: Inaction as much as action led to the crisis. 
Angelides takes issue with what he perceives to be the easy and facile narrative that the crisis 
was caused by a perfect storm of events. Rather, the FCIC’s findings show the crisis can be 
traced to a series of trends leading to weakened regulatory oversight and riskier financial 
activity. Says Angelides, 
This was a result of  deliberate actions and deliberate inactions. It was a result of a 
deregulatory trend in the financial industry that had manifested itself over a couple 
of decades. It was a result of a decision to go with the light hand of supervision. The 
idea that was a dvanced by Wall Street is that Wall Street had developed very 
sophisticated risk models and so, of course, there was no incentive for an institution 
to blow itself up, to take wild and undue risk. Their instincts for self-preservation and 
their sophisticated modeling would preclude that, and therefore, you didn't need the 
kind of regulatory oversight of the financial market you might have needed in earlier 
eras. 
A key area where lack of oversight came back to haunt the financial system , Angelides 
pointed ou t, was the over -the-counter (OTC) derivatives market. Despite concerns raised 
about growing risks and a lack of transparency in the OTC derivatives markets as far back as 
1998, the Commodities Future Modernization Act of 2000 banned the regulation of OTC 
derivatives. High-profile industry and government executives, including Robert Rubin, Alan 
38
Lessons Learned: Phil Angelides Ward

--- Page 6 ---
Greenspan, Arthur Levitt, and Larry Summers threw their support behind deregulation, says 
Angelides, and OTC derivatives grew to be a huge market and were a key culprit in the GFC.  
Another area significantly addressed in the commission’s report and alleged by Angelides is 
that despite widespread evidence of an explosion in subprime lending, an unsustainable rise 
in housing prices, runaway predatory lending practices , and a doubling of mortgage debt 
between 2000 and 2007, federal regulators cast a blind eye. At the same time, says Angelides, 
banks and Wall Street firms were engaging in riskier trading activities accompanied by a 
dramatic increase in the overnight lending market, typically a sign of stress.  
Angelides reserves his harshest criticism for the Federal Reserve, under then -Chairman 
Greenspan, for its hesitancy to enforce and regulate. Says Angelides, 
As early as the late 1990s, there were community groups and  others coming to the 
Federal Reserve complaining about predatory lending practices metastasizing across 
the country. In 2000 or 2001, the Federal Reserve decides to look at the issues and 
adopts a set of rules, but they ’re so weak they only affect about 1 % of subprime 
lending. All through the 2000s, the Federal Reserve is presented with more and more 
evidence about the egregious lending practices that are happening throughout the 
country, but Alan Greenspan refused to act.  
 
Dated: January 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-02 
 
39
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 4