--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 2 Issue 4 
2020 
Lessons Learned: Wendy Edelberg Lessons Learned: Wendy Edelberg 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Political Economy 
Commons, and the Public Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2020) "Lessons Learned: Wendy Edelberg," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 2 : Iss. 4, 40-42. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1126 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss4/3 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol2/iss4/3

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Wendy Edelberg 
 
By Sandra Ward 
Wendy Edelberg served initially as Director of Research at the Financial Crisis Inquiry 
Commission (FCIC) before eventually being named Executive Director. Established in the wake 
of the global financial crisis of 2007-09, the FCIC was a bipartisan panel of six Democrats and 
four Republicans charged with determining the causes of the worst financial crisis since the 
Great Depression. Edelberg built the organization from the ground up, hiring staff, instituting 
operating procedures, establishing guidelines, managing communications, and reporting to the 
commissioners. This “Lesson Learned” is based on an interview with Ms. Edelberg. 
Constant communication and laser -like focus  were essenti al to the commission 
meeting its goals. 
As Executive Director of the FCIC, Edelberg faced an “impossible task,” managing staff as well 
as commissioners, devising a strategy to optimize the FCIC’s effectiveness, and meeting 
demanding deadlines. She met the challenge, she says, by staying “ruthlessly focused” as well 
as nimble and decisive.  
She observes,  
A lot of what I brought to it was just brute-force effort. It was not leaving at night until 
the last fire that day had been put out. What I could see from outside the position and 
then once I was in the position was the need to have constant communication. I had a 
lot of communication with the commissioners, and any commissioner who wanted to 
talk to me could ; any commissioner who wanted to email with me did. I was in 
constant communication, at least, with the chair and the vice chair and many of the 
other commissioners as well. I tried to bring a lot of integrity to that. 
The commission’s life span was finite and there was a drop-dead date to produce a report to 
Congress. Edelberg relates that a ccomplishing the goals in such short order required a 
complete change in approach  from what the commiss ion had originally employed. She had 
to make people realize they didn’t have the luxury of time and had to keep them focused on 
a singular mission. “People needed to see the vision ,” Edelberg relates, “ I needed to see the 
vision.” But she also emphasized that it was “a very weird way for people to work together,” 
in such a “short time in a unique workplace.”  
In light of these circumstances, Edelberg said she realized that maintaining a positive morale 
would be key to the commission achieving its goals: 
I was well aware that keeping everybody focused on the mission we were doing and 
feeling that it was an important mission and seeing their own contribution to that 
mission was critical to our success. If I couldn’t make people happy, at least I could 
40

--- Page 4 ---
try to make them see that what we were doing was really, really important and that 
their contribution was really important. Even if they weren’t going to win every fight 
and they were going to have to make compromises that frustrated them, at least they 
saw that. 
Open lines of communication proved critical to the commission’s success and effectiveness, 
notes Edelberg, as did  keeping everyone’s eye on the prize: the final report.  Setting 
parameters and knowing limitations helped keep folks from getting sidetracked down  
endless rabbit holes in pursuit of interesting tidbits that weren’t necessarily integral to the 
report. She borrowed a quote from Voltaire to further illustrate her point,  “Let’s not let the 
perfect be the enemy of the good.”  
In addition to keeping the researchers moving forward, Edelberg also needed to manage the 
work of the six Democratic - and four Republican -appointed commissioners.  She quickly 
learned the fine art of “triangulating,” that communication among political figures often 
occurs through third parties and mediators . “When commissioners did not want to speak 
directly to each other, they would speak to me and I would relay the information,” Edelberg 
said. Of this delicate position, she commented further: 
I wasn’t trying to keep them  aligned. I was trying to keep them on task. I was trying 
to make sure we got to a place where we had a report that had integrity and was useful 
and we were proud of. To that goal, my main strategy was to keep everybody talking 
and to have the commissioner s know they were heard by the staff. If the 
commissioners had a question they thought was important , that they wanted 
answered, if they had research they wanted done, the staff would move heaven and 
earth to try to accomplish that.  
In speaking about the content of the FCIC report, Edelberg cited a number of points that she 
considered to be truly valuable among its findings. 
Look past the obvious: There were two separate crises, a housing crisis and a financial 
crisis, each with its own distinct cause. 
Edelberg expresses frustration that the GFC is viewed most often as a monolithic event that 
more rightly should be viewed as two crises: a housing crisis as well as a financial crisis.  
Referring to the financial crisis and housing crisis interchangeably is a critical mistake in 
logic, Edelberg opines. A sound financial system would’ve been resilient enough to withstand 
a housing market collapse. She notes, 
It turned out the collapse of the housing market caused the financial crisis because of 
the way the financial system was set up and because of its exposure to housing 
through leverage and a lack of transparency and how incredibly far reaching that 
exposure was. All of those things meant that a housing crisis translated into a financial 
crisis, but it was not inevitable. 
41
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
The distinction is important  when it comes to making policy decisions and addressing 
weaknesses and vulnerabilities in both areas , says Ede lberg, and the commission tried to 
capture this distinction in its report. 
Accurate documenting of problems helps to solve the problems.  
The middle of a crisis is not the time to try and gain access to information about troubled 
institutions, argues Edelberg, as it could lead to more instability in the markets. This was an 
ongoing issue in the GFC. Managements of financial institutions, it turned out, often didn’t 
know the extent of the risk their companies had assumed, nor did regulators have any 
window on the type and magnitude of risks being taken. Establishing a communications flow 
among critical agencies and industries is vital to successful crisis management. 
Says Edelberg,  
What you really want is the information all shared well in advance so that if 
something goes wrong, you at least have some information that you can possibly act 
on. Once you ’re in the midst of a problem and you ’re in the dark as a financial firm 
and as a regulator, it’s problematically late. 
Edelberg pointed out that the commission’s report documented the lack of information and 
transparency that existed at the institutions and the regulators. She also said that steps have 
been taken to require more reporting and collection of information. A significant outcome is 
that these concerns served as the basis for the formation of the Office of Financial Research, 
and regulators are now more assertive in demanding information, Edelberg said.  
 
_____________________________________ 
Date: January 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-18 
 
42
Lessons Learned: Wendy Edelberg Ward