--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 2 Issue 1 
2020 
Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises 
B: U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis B: U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis 
June Rhee 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Administrative Law Commons, Banking and Finance Law Commons, Bankruptcy Law 
Commons, Corporate Finance Commons, Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, 
Finance Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Politics Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Rhee, June and Metrick, Andrew (2020) "Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises 
B: U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 2 : Iss. 1, 51-68. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1049 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss1/4 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol2/iss1/4

--- Page 3 ---
Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to 
Financial Crises B:  
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis1  
 
June Rhee2 
Andrew Metrick3 
 
 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2015-3b-v1 
July 15, 2015 
Abstract 
During 2008-09, the federal government extended multiple guarantee programs in an effort 
to restore the financial market and contain the panic and crisis in the market. For example, 
the Treasury provided a temporary guarantee program for the money market funds, the 
FDIC decided to stand behind certain debts and non -interest-bearing transaction accounts, 
and the Treasury, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve agreed to share losses in certain assets 
belonging to Citigroup. This case reviews these guarantee programs implemented during the 
global financial crisis by the government and explores the different rationale that shaped 
certain design features of each program.   
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
1  This case study is one of three Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) case modules considering the 
Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises. The others are:  
• Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises A: Haircuts and Resolutions  
• Guarantees and Capital Infusions in Response to Financial Crises B: U.S. Guarantees During the Financial 
Crisis 
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises. 
2  Director, MMS in Systemic Risk and Senior Editor, Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS), Yale School of 
Management. 
3  Janet L. Yellen  Professor of Finance and Management, and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of 
Management. 
51

--- Page 4 ---
1. Introduction  
During 2008-09, the federal government extended multiple guarantee programs in an effort 
to restore the financial market and contain the panic and crisis in the market. For example, 
to stop a disruption and run in the money market funds (MMFs ), the Treasury provided a 
guarantee for the investors of the fund ensuring that the value of their shares would not fall 
below $1.00 per share. Additionally, the Congress raised the maximum guaranteed value of 
the FDIC -insured accounts from $100,000 to $2 50,000 per account. The Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) also established the Debt Guarantee Program (DGP) standing 
behind certain newly issued senior unsecured debt to restore the interbank lending market, 
and the Transaction Account Guarantee  Program (TAGP) covering non -interest-bearing 
transaction accounts to prevent runs in small banks by maintaining depositor confidence. 
Later under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), the Treasury, the FDIC, and the 
Federal Reserve jointly decided to guarantee and share losses of certain assets belonging to 
Citigroup and Bank of America. However, the guarantee program for Bank of America was 
not finalized. Overall, the guarantees provided by the government exceeded the total value 
of TARP, making guarantees the single largest element of the government’s response to the 
financial crisis (COP 2009).  
Compared to the direct purchases of bank assets, a guarantee does not require any upfront 
cost from the government and the taxpayers. When government agencies agreed to provide 
the guarantee programs discussed above, taxpayers paid no immediate price. This low 
upfront cost allowed the government to guarantee large pools of assets large pool of assets 
and the programs were to play an important role in calming t he panicked financial market. 
For example, lenders who were unwilling to risk their money in distressed and uncertain 
markets became much more willing to participate after the U.S. government promised to 
backstop any losses (Ibid., 2009). 
These guarantees, however, have their downside. Despite the low upfront cost, guarantees 
still carry a considerable risk to taxpayers. There is always a possibility that, if the 
guaranteed assets radically declined in value, especially in a volatile and unstable market, 
taxpayers could suffer enormous losses. They could also create moral hazard and price 
distortions in the market (Ibid., 2009). 
By reviewing different designs of the guarantee programs established during the financial 
crisis, we are able to learn what features of the program most efficiently balanced the upside 
and downside of a guarantee and which designs can be effective in dealing with a future 
crisis.  
The remainder of the case is organized as follows : Section 2 discusses the temporary 
guarantee provided for the MMFs by the Treasury to prevent any further “breaking the buck” 
in the market. Section 3 describes the temporary liquidity guarantee program established by 
the FDIC to promote interbank lending and prevent runs in smaller banks. Section 4 provides 
details on the guarantee and loss sharing program jointly set forth by the Treasury, the FDIC, 
and the Federal Reserve to save Citigroup.  
Questions  
1. In limiting the source of funding for the MMF guarantee program only to ESF, what 
was the government’s reas on in the decision that a $50 billion ESF could effectively 
stop a run in a $3 trillion MMF market? 
52
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
2. Why did the government decide to include all eligible MMFs rather than considering 
the differences in run potential between institutional vs. retail holders, and prime vs. 
non-prime funds?  
 
3. What was the reason behind the decision to limit eligible MMFs to funds having a 
market-based NAV on September 19, 2008 , of $0.995 or greater, and guaranteeing 
only the shares held as of September 19, 2008?  
 
4. Did the MMF guarantee during the crisis set a precedent that raises the prospect or 
creates moral hazard of the Treasury using Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) for 
other domestic activities that can be plausibly linked to ensuring international 
financial stability? 
 
5. Why were certain guarantee programs designed as opt -in rather than opt -out 
programs, and vice versa? What features and objectives of a guarantee program are 
made more effective with an opt-in rather than an opt-out, and vice versa?  
 
6. Under the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP), what is the reason 
behind the coverage limit (date, amount, etc.) of the DGP, as opposed to unlimited 
coverage of the guarantee in the TAGP?  
 
7. For the Asset Guarantee Program (AGP), did the Federal Reserve, the Treasury , and 
the FDIC have differing rationale and guiding principles behind each guarantee 
program and when invoking systemic risk exception, and if so, what were  the 
dynamics among the three organizations? 
 
8. Did the government intended to utilize AGP (or guarantee and loss-sharing provided 
for Citigroup) only for Citigroup and Bank of America, or did it have an intention of 
possibly expanding it to other institutions? If not, then why limit it to only those two 
organizations? 
 
9. How would the government’s response to Citigroup’s troubles be different now with 
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the Financial 
Stability Oversight Council in charge of developing the specific criteria and analytical 
framework for assessing systemic significance?  
2.  Temporary Guarantee Program for Money Market Funds 
A money market fund (MMF) is a type of mutual fund regulated primarily by Rule 2a-7 of the 
Investment Company Act of 1940, and is mandated to invest in high -liquid and low -risk 
securities. These securities include government securities, certificates of deposit, and 
commercial paper of companies. MMFs strive to maintain their  net asset value (NAV)  at a 
constant $1.00 per share and only the yield goes up and down. NAV in the context of MMF is 
calculated based on the closing market prices of the securities held in the fund’s portfolio, 
less any liabilities, and dividing this value by the number of shar es outstanding in the fund. 
Before the 2008 financial crisis, MMFs had  been widely believed to be as safe as bank 
deposits, and leading up to the crisis, MMFs were important providers of liquidity to financial 
intermediaries (SEC 2015). 
However, if the fund’s portfolio performs poorly, MMF’s NAV may fall below $1.00 , and this 
is referred to as “breaking the buck,” which is a rare occurrence. On September 16, 2008, a 
day after Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy, Reserve Primary Fund (RPF), a $62 billion 
53
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 6 ---
prime and oldest MMF in the U.S., broke the buck. It had been 14 years since the last MMF 
had broken the buck. RPF’s NAV fell to $0.97, and its troubles started when it had to write 
off $785 million of commercial paper and medium -term notes issued by Lehman Brothers 
(Bloomberg 2008). 
In the days after RPF broke the buck, investors redeemed more than $300 billion from prime 
MMFs, and the commercial paper market shut down for even the high -quality issuers. For 
example, on September 18, 2008, Putnam Investments, one of the oldest MMFs serving only 
the institutional investors, announced that it was closing and liquidating Putnam Prime 
Money Market Fund, which was a $12.3 billion fund (NY Times September 18, 2008).  
On September 19, 2008, to stop the run on MMFs, then-president George W. Bush approved 
the use of existing authorities by the then -Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson to make 
available as necessary the assets of the Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) for up to $50 
billion to “insure the holdings of an y publicly offered eligible money market mutual fund — 
both retail and institutional —that pays a fee to participate in the program.” This approval 
was done without seeking Congressional authorization (Treasury 9/19/2008).  
Funded by the $50 billion available in the ESF, and not backed by full faith and credit of the 
U.S., the Treasury was to guarantee more than $3 trillion of MMF shares. At its peak, this 
program guaranteed $3.2 trillion in assets (Treasury 2010). In addition, the Federal Reserve 
introduced a series of liquidity programs to help stop the run on MMFs (FSOC 2012).  
ESF was established by the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, as amended in 1977, and provides as 
follows:  
the Department of the Treasury has a stabilization fund …Consistent with the 
obligations of the Government in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on orderly 
exchange arrangements and an orderly system of exchange rates, the Secretary …, 
with the approval of the President, may deal in gold, foreign exchange, and other 
instruments of credit and securities. 
No loan or credit can be extended by the ESF for more than six months in any twelve-month 
period, unless the President provides a written determination to the Congress that “unique 
or emergency circumstances” necessitate a term greater than six months. Currently, the 
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA), enacted October 3, 2008, requires 
that the Treasury reimburse the ESF for any funds used related to  the Treasury’s guarantee 
of MMFs, and prohibits the Treasury from using the ESF in the future to guarantee MMFs. 
Under the MMF guarantee program, the Treasury allowed all eligible MMFs to participate in 
the program, and each fund decided to participate in the program. To be eligible to 
participate in the program, a MMF must: 
(i) be registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940; 
(ii) offer securities registered under the Securities Act of 1933; 
(iii) have a policy of maintaining a stable net asset value or share price of $1.00 per share 
(iv) be operated in compliance with Rule 2a -7 under the Investment Company Act of 
1940; and 
(v) have a market-based net asset value per share on September 19, 2008 , of $0.995 or 
greater. 
54
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
Eligible funds included both taxable and non -taxable funds. Eligible funds had to apply and 
pay a fee 4 to participate in the program. The application include d submitting an executed 
version of the Treasury’s form of Guarantee Agreement and certain related documentation 
including an acknowledgement and undertaking by the fund’s investment adviser to the 
Treasury via e-mail.  
Under the guarantee program, investors’ holdings in participating MMFs as of September 19, 
2008, were protected. Payment under the program was triggered by a “guarantee event.” A 
guarantee event occurred when the participating MMF’s share NAV fell below $0.995. When 
a guarantee event occurred, the Treasury was to use the ESF to ensure that investors in the 
failing MMF received $1.00 per covered share up to the extent of their holdings in that MMF 
as of September 19, 2008.  
In order to ensure payment under the guarantee program, after a guarantee event, the MMF 
were required to, among other things, initiate actions necessary to commence the liquidation 
process of the fund within five business days and complete the liquidation of the fund on or 
before the 30th day following the guarantee event unless the Treasury consented in writing 
to a later date. The guarantee event w ould be deemed not to have occurred, however, if the 
MMF’s NAV return ed to an amount greater than or equal to $0.995 before the start of 
liquidation. The guarantee agreements specifically limited aggregate coverage to the amount 
of funds available in the ESF on the date of a guarantee event, with investor claims in excess 
of available funds subject to pro-ration.   
The original termination date for the program was April 30, 2009 with the Secretary’s option 
to extend the program up to the close of business on September 18, 2009. In order to 
maintain coverage throughout the extended period of the program, MMFs had to renew their 
participation in the program after each extension. After two extensions, the MMF guarantee 
program expired on September 18, 2009. 
Rationale and Assessment of the Program 
The Treasury stated that this program was designed to address temporary dislocations in 
credit ma rkets. More specifically, its purpose was to “enhance market confidence by 
alleviating investors’ concerns about the ability of money market mutual funds to absorb 
losses.” According to Treasury, it was intended specifically to “stop a run on money market 
mutual funds in the wake of the failure of Lehman Brothers” and to alleviate concerns 
regarding the industry because MMFs “are an important investment vehicle for many 
Americans and a fundamental source of financing for our capital markets and financial 
institutions. Maintaining confidence in the money market mutual fund industry is critical to 
protecting the integrity and stability of the global financial system” (Treasury September 
2009). 
“While the program had no direct cost to taxpayers, it earned more than $1 billion in income” 
(Geithner Testimony 2009). Also, later assessment by the Financial Stability Oversight 
Council of the guarantee program acknowledges that it ultimately helped MMFs to continue 
to function as intermediaries in the financial markets (FSOC 2012).  
__________________________________________________________________ 
4 If a fund’s market-value-based net asset value per share on September 19, 2008, was greater than or equal to 
$0.9975, the fund’s fee for participation in the Program until December 18, 2008, is 0.01% of the product of the 
number of the fund’s shares outstanding on September 19, 2008 , and $1. If the fund’s market -value-based net 
asset value per share on September 19, 2008 , was less than $0.9975 but greater than or equal to $0.995, the 
fee is 0.015% of such product. 
55
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 8 ---
3.  Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program 
On October 14, 2008, as part of a coordinated response by the U.S. government to the 
disruption in the financial system and the collapse of credit markets, the FDIC adopted the 
Temporary Liquidity G uarantee Program (TLGP) (Bair 2008). The FDIC issued an interim 
rule for TLGP on October 29, 2008, with a request for comments, and published the final rule 
incorporating these comments on November 21, 2008.  
In implementing the TLGP, the FDIC relied on Se ction 13(c)(4)(G) of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act invoking the systemic risk exception to the least -costly resolution 
requirement. Under the Act, the FDIC may take actions necessary to avoid or mitigate 
systemic risk when the Secretary of the Treasury, upon the written recommendations of the 
Board of Directors of the FDIC and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (each 
recommendation through a vote of not less than two -thirds of the members of such Board), 
in consultation with the President det ermines that (i) the FDIC’s compliance with the least -
cost resolution rule with respect to an insured depository would have serious adverse effects 
on economic conditions or financial stability; and (ii) the assistance by the FDIC would avoid 
or mitigate such adverse effects.  
The TLGP consisted of the Debt Guarantee Program (DGP) and the Transaction Account 
Guarantee Program (TAGP). The goal of the two programs differed in that the DGP was 
mainly to restore normal functioning to the interbank lending market, and the TAGP was to 
reassure bank customers ’ confidence in safe banking, particularly in smaller banks. The 
rationale behind these two programs will be discussed in further detail below. While the 
guarantee states that it is backed by full faith and credit of the U.S. government, the FDIC 
stressed that the program does not rely on taxpayer funding or on the Deposit Insurance 
Fund (DIF), whose primary purpose is to insure deposits and depositors at insured banks 
and to resolve failed banks. The program was designed such that it would be funded entirely 
from its own fees and would require no expenditure of the FDIC or other government funds 
(Final Rule 2008).  
The DGP guaranteed newly issued senior unsecured debt 5 of the FDIC -insured depository 
institutions, U.S. bank holding companies, U.S. financial holding companies, U.S. savings and 
loan holding companies, and affiliates of FDIC -insured depository institutions through 
maturity or June 30, 2012, whichever came first. The amount of debt to be guaranteed by the 
DGP was capped at 125% of senior unsecured debt outstanding as of September 30, 2008 , 
and that was scheduled to mature on or before June 30, 2012. This termination date was 
later extended to December 31, 2012, in 2009. The DGP, unlike the MMF guarantee program 
discussed in the previous section, enrolled the eligible institutions and banks automatically 
and each institution had an option to opt out from the program (Ibid., 2008). The list of banks 
opting out of the program was published on the FDIC’s webpage. 
“Senior unsecured debt” does not include short-term senior unsecured debt with a maturity 
of thirty days or less, due to comments received for the interim rule where it was voiced that 
the fee for the DGP would be prohibitively expensi ve for short -term maturity instruments 
such as federal funds. Fees were calculated on a sliding rate scale based on an instrument’s 
maturity, where the fees for shorter term debt were less than 75 basis points, and for longer 
term debts were slightly highe r. The program imposed limitation s on  a participating 
institution in issuing non -guaranteed debt by requiring the entity to max out on the DGP 
__________________________________________________________________ 
5 These debts were the ones issued between October 14, 2008 , and June 30, 2009, but then this period was 
extended through October 31, 2009. 
56
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
guaranteed amount before issuing non -guaranteed debt, to disclose that such debt was not 
guaranteed, and to pay additional fees (Ibid., 2008).   
The TAGP, on the other hand, guaranteed non -interest-bearing transaction accounts at the 
FDIC-insured depository institutions. The FDIC defined a “non-interest-bearing transaction 
account” as a transaction account on which t he insured depository institution pays no 
interest and does not reserve the right to require advance notice of intended withdrawals. It 
included both commercial and consumer accounts and there was no limit to the guaranteed 
amount. This program, like the DGP, covered all eligible accounts unless the bank where the 
account was held opted out from the program. Beginning on December 6, 2008, institutions 
that did not opt  out of the TAGP paid annual fees on balances in non -interest-bearing 
transaction accounts that exceed ed $250,000. This was because $250,000 was already 
covered under the FDIC’s standard insurance coverage rules. The original termination date 
of the TAGP was December 31, 2009, but this was extended twice and the program ultimately 
expired on December 31, 2010.  
After December 31, 2010, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
(Dodd-Frank Act) provided temporary unlimited deposit insurance coverage for non -
interest-bearing transaction accounts through December 31, 2012, regardless of the balance 
in the account and the ownership capacity of the funds. This coverage essentially replaced 
the expired TAGP, and was available to all depositors, including consumers, businesses, and 
government entities. The coverage was separate from, and in addition to, the standard 
insurance coverage provided for a depositor’s other accounts held at an FDIC-insured bank. 
Following Figure 1 summarizes the key terms of the DGP and the TAGP.  
Figure 1: Comparison of DGP and TAGP  
 DGP TAGP 
What is covered? Newly issued senior unsecured 
debt, issued between October 14, 
2008 to October 31, 2009, of the 
FDIC-insured depository 
institutions, U.S. bank holding 
companies, U.S. financial holding 
companies, U.S. savings and loan 
holding companies, and affil iates 
of FDIC -insured depository 
institutions. 
Non-interest-bearing transaction 
accounts at the FDIC -insured 
depository institutions. 
Coverage limit 125% of senior unsecured debt 
outstanding as of September 30, 
2008, and that is scheduled to 
mature on or before June 30, 
2012. 
No limit.  
Opt-in or opt-out Opt-out. Opt-out. 
Expiration Original termination date, June 
30, 2012, was extended and the 
program terminated December 
31, 2012. 
Original termination date, 
December 31, 2009, was extended 
twice and the program ultimately 
expired on December 31, 2010. 
 
57
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 10 ---
Rationale and Assessment of the Program 
Over the course of the DGP ’s existence, 122 entities issued TLGP debt. The DGP, at its peak, 
guaranteed $345.8 billion of outstanding debt at participating institutions (FDIC 2013). Over 
7,100 banks and thrifts—86% of FDIC insured institutions—initially stayed in the TAGP, and 
at the peak of the program in December 2009, the TAGP guaranteed deposits amounted to 
$834 billion (Cave 2011). 
In the press release announcing the TLGP, the FDIC stated that the program was a “part of a 
coordinated response by the U.S. government to the disruption in the financial system and 
the collapse of credit markets.” As seen in the legal authority backing the program, it was an 
initiative to counter the system-wide crisis in the nation’s financial sector. More specifically, 
the program was to hold down the cost of any future bank failure and to solve the liquidity 
problem in the financial market by injecting more capital into the banking system, freeing up 
credit markets for creditworthy businesses and consumers, and giving banks the self -
assurance to resume normal lending. It was an attempt to unlock interbank credit markets 
and restore rationality into the credit spread (Bair 2008). 
The final rule for the TLGP states that the DGP, in particular, was designed to be a time -
limited program to restore normal functioning to the market by helping institutions to obtain 
stable, longer-term sources of funding where liquidity is most lacking. The DGP was further 
extended to the unsecured senior debt issued up to October 31, 2009, because the FDIC was 
of an opinion that the credit market had not yet fully stabilized by mid -year 2009 
(Amendment 2009). 
At the same time, the FDIC makes clear that the TLGP’s purpose was not to promote 
innovative, exotic, or complex funding structures, but to provide liquidity to the interbank -
lending market. The specific limitations and design features of the program were to reduce 
the risk of adverse selection (i.e. limitation on the issuance of non -guaranteed debt) (Final 
Rule 2008). It has been mentioned that the reason why the program only covers newly issued 
debt was to open up interbank lending without di srupting the market or intervening in the 
market too much. The FDIC stated that it seeks balance between suppressing uncontrolled 
growth or funding reckless lending of the banks, and opening up interbank lending, ensuring 
banks have the liquidity to lend to quality credits and keeping the bank business open (FDIC 
10/14/2008).  
On the other hand, the TAGP was to reassure bank customers ’ confidence in safe banking 
that is vital to public confidence in the banking system. It was to provide stability to the 
insured banks, particularly smaller ones, enabling their commercial customers to continue 
to do business without disruption (Bair 2008).  
The FDIC collected $10.4 billion in fees and surcharges under the DGP, and as of December 
31, 2012, the FDIC had paid $15 3 million in losses resulting from six participating entities 
defaulting on debt issued under the DGP. The majority of these losses ($113 million) arose 
from banks with outstanding DGP notes that failed in 2011 and were placed into 
receivership. On the other hand, the FDIC collected $1.2 billion in fees under the TAGP, but 
cumulative estimated TAGP losses on failures as of December 31, 2012, totaled $2.1 billion 
(FDIC 2013). 
Overall, considering the profits and losses from both the DGP and the TAGP, the TLG P fees 
exceeded the losses (Ibid ., 2013). From inception of the TLGP, it was the FDIC’s policy to 
recognize revenue to the DIF for any portion of guarantee fees in excess of amounts needed 
to cover potential losses upon expiration of the TLGP guarantee period or earlier (COP 2009). 
58
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
As the guarantee program came to an end, the official at the FDIC emphasized “while TLGP 
clearly led to a positive outcome, it is important that financial institutions replace their 
reliance on government -guaranteed debt with pri vate borrowing.” Banks now have been 
gradually able to rely again on longer-term debts, and non-guaranteed debts returned to the 
pre-crisis level (Cave 2011). 
4. Asset Guarantee Program under T ARP  
The Asset Guarantee Program (AGP) was a joint effort by the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, 
and the FDIC. Although the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the FDIC jointly announced 
this guarantee program, the Treasury was the only agency that referred to this tripartite 
initiative as the AGP. The latter two agencies instead referred to this agreement as “a package 
of guarantees, liquidity access, and capital.” The program was to protect the value of certain 
assets held by qualifying financial institutions by agreeing to absorb a portion of losses on 
those assets. It was to support institutions whose failure would have caused serious harm to 
the financial system and the broader economy. Two institutions were to receive assistance 
under the AGP —Bank of America and Citigroup — but the AGP arrange ment for Bank of 
America never finalized (SIGTARP 2011). 
Citigroup 
On October 28, 2008, the Treasury acquired $25 billion of preferred stock of Citigroup, as 
well as related warrants, as part of capital purchases made under the Capital Purchase 
Program (CPP) established under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). CPP was 
available to a broad range of financial institutions. However, on November 17, 2008, 
Citigroup’s stock price dropped. Figure 2 shows a steeper drop of Citigroup’s stock price 
compared to its peers during the week of November 17. The Treasury, the Federal Reserve , 
and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) all had expressed concern that 
depositors might start a run on Citigroup and the bank would suffer a severe liquidity crisis. 
This concern was substantiated on November 21, 2008 , with significant corporate 
withdrawals. The same day the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) witnessed that 
counterparties began to pull back from Citigroup because of its perceived decline in cre dit 
worthiness (Ibid., 2011).  
After Citigroup came back for additional assistance, the FRBNY requested that it submit a 
proposal for additional assistance. Citigroup’s proposal requested that the government 
guarantee 100% of the total value of $306 billio n in a pool of specified troubled assets, and 
in return it would issue the government $20 billion in preferred stock that pays 5% annual 
dividend and can be repaid or converted into common stock at Citigroup’s preference in five 
years. First loss would hav e resulted in a loss for the government , and the pool of assets 
included assets that the “public most feared” (Ibid., 2011). 
Rejecting Citigroup’s initial offer, on November 23, 2008, the Treasury, the Federal Reserve 
and the FDIC agreed on a guarantee pro gram according to the terms set forth by the 
government. The Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the FDIC were to share potential losses 
on certain parts of Citigroup assets valued initially at approximately $306 billion. The 
Treasury later named this program the AGP. The specific terms of the AGP were agreed upon 
well after the announcement of the government’s preliminary framework of the $306 billion 
asset pool guarantee (Ibid., 2011). 
On December 23, 2008, the government’s representatives provided Citigroup with a draft of 
the asset pool agreement including asset criteria on types of assets eligible for the 
59
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 12 ---
guaranteed pool. While there was no statutory or regulatory deadline for completing the 
Master Agreement, Citigroup wanted to complete it before its ea rnings were released in 
January 2009. A Master Agreement was signed on January 15, 2009, but according to the 
FRBNY it was not feasible to finalize the assets in the pool and complete a thorough due -
diligence review of the assets by then (Ibid., 2011). 
The Treasury, the Federal Reserve , and the FDIC expressed concerns over setting the loss 
positions and pricing appropriately or executing final documentation without a conclusive 
listing of assets in the guaranteed pool. Taking these concerns into consideration, the Master 
Agreement was structured in a way that did not specify the precise value or composition of 
the guaranteed asset pool, but included a post-signing process for negotiating and finalizing 
those details (Ibid., 2011). 
On November 17, 2009, almost one year after the announcement of the guarantee program, 
and just about a month before the AGP terminated, the asset pool was finalized at $300.75 
billion. During the screening and replacement of Citigroup’s suggested assets in the asset 
pool, the FRBNY hired PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (PwC) and BlackRock as consultants for 
deciding which assets are to be included in the guaranteed asset pool. However, in December 
2009, regulators approved Citigroup’s exit from the AGP (Ibid., 2011). Figure 3 summarizes 
the timeline of major events in the guarantee program for Citigroup.  
Figure 2: Citigroup and Peers Cumulative Stock Price for the Week of November 17, 2008 
(cumulative change is from November 14, 2008) 
 
Source: SIGTARP 2011. 
 
  
60
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 3: Timeline of Major Events in the AGP 
 
Source: SIGTARP 2011. 
 
Under the AGP, Citigroup would have absorbed initial losses arising from the covered asset 
pool up to $39.5 billion. Citigroup would then absorb 10% of any losses in excess of that. The 
Treasury was first in line among the federal agencies to absorb losses up to $5 billion. The 
FDIC then would absorb the next $10 billion of the losses, and the Federal Reserve w ould 
cover any further federal liability by way of a non -recourse loan to Citig roup. These 
arrangements were to be in effect for 10 years for residential mortgage -related assets and 
five years for other assets. As compensation for these guarantees, the Treasury and the FDIC 
received $4 billion and $3 billion, respectively, of preferr ed stock in Citigroup, which bore 
dividends at 8% per annum. Any residual financing provided by the Federal Reserve would 
complete the remainder of the term of the guarantee arrangements. Asset s eligible for the 
guaranteed pool had to satisfy the following conditions set forth by the government:  
(i) the asset was owned by a Citigroup affiliate and had been included on its balance 
sheet as of November 21, 2008;  
(ii) no foreign assets could be included;  
(iii) no equity securities (such as shares of stock in other entities) or derivatives of 
such equity securities could be included;  
(iv) all assets in the pool were to have been issued or originated before March 14, 
2008;  
(v) Citigroup and its affiliates could not be the obligor of any assets; and  
(vi) the assets were not to be guaranteed by any governmental authority pursuant to 
another agreement. 
Rationale Behind the Program 
In the joint statement set forth on November 23, 2008, the Treasury, the FDIC , and the 
Federal Reserve stated that in guaranteeing certain assets of Citigroup, “the U.S. government 
is taking the actions necessary to strengthen the financial system and protect U.S. taxpayers 
and the U.S. economy.” They also promised to use all their resources to preserve the strength 
of the banking institutions and promote the process of repair  and recovery and to manage 
risks. They set forth the following guiding principles:  
(i) To support a healthy resumption of credit flows to households and businesses; 
(ii) To exercise prudent stewardship of taxpayer resources; 
October 28, 2008 
(Injection of $25 
billion) 
November 23, 2008 
(Announcement of the 
guarantee program)
January 15, 2009 
(Master 
Agreement signed)
List of 
guaranteed 
assets being 
negotiated
November 17, 2009 
(List of guaranteed assets 
is finalized)
December 23, 
2009 
(Government 
approves exit from 
AGP)
61
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 14 ---
(iii) Careful circumscription of the involvement of government in the financial sector; 
and 
(iv) To bolster the efforts of financial institutions to attract private capital. 
Even before the announcement of Citigroup assistance, the Federal Reserve Chairman 
Bernanke stated that it was “not even a close call to assist” Citigroup, and FRBNY President 
Timothy Geithner said, “We’ve told the world we’re not going to let any of our major 
institutions fail. We are going to have to make it really clear we’re standing behind Citigroup.” 
FRBNY Pr esident Geithner describes a series of calls among representatives of Federal 
agencies involved in saving Citigroup as “a continuous conversation with the principals on 
all sorts of ideas on how to do it. We were guided by two objectives: One, we needed a 
definitive strategy that would work, and, two, we had to do it in a way that would be most 
economical and fair for the U.S. Government and protect its interests” (SIGTARP 2011). 
Guarantee by the Treasury 
The Treasury relied on Section 102 of EESA to implement the AGP. It allows the Treasury to 
assume a loss position on certain assets held by the qualifying financial institution. The 
section also allows that “If the Secretary establishes the program authori zed under section 
101 [authorizing the Treasury to purchase troubled assets from any financial institutions] , 
then the Secretary shall establish a program to guarantee troubled assets originated or 
issued prior to March 14, 2008 ,” and “the Secretary may de velop guarantees of troubled 
assets and the associated premiums for such guarantees.” The expected value of premium 
was to be no less than the expected value of the losses to TARP from the guarantee, and the 
guaranteed portfolio had to adhere to a set of portfolio management guidelines set forth by 
the government. 
At the onset of the program, the Treasury stated that the program would not be “widely 
available” and would be applied with extreme discretion in order to improve market 
confidence in the systemic ally significant institution and in financial markets broadly.  The 
Treasury explained that “systemically significant ” means that “failure would impose 
significant losses on creditors and counterparties, call into question the financial strength of 
other si milarly situated financial institutions, disrupt financial markets, raise borrowing 
costs for households and businesses, and reduce household wealth” (Treasury 12/31/2008). 
It would determine the eligibility of participants and the allocation of resources on a case -
by-case basis, and consider the following factors in deciding what is systemically significant: 
(i) The extent to which destabilization of the institution could threaten the viability 
of creditors and counterparties exposed to the institution, wh ether directly or 
indirectly;  
(ii) The extent to which an institution is at risk of a loss of confidence and the degree 
to which that stress is caused by a distressed or illiquid portfolio of assets;  
(iii) The number and size of financial institutions th at are similarly situated, or that 
would be likely to be affected by destabilization of the institution being considered 
for the program;  
(iv) Whether the institution is sufficiently important to the nation’s financial and 
economic system that a loss of c onfidence in the firm’s financial position could 
potentially cause major disruptions to credit markets or payments and settlement 
systems, destabilize asset prices, significantly increase uncertainty, or lead to similar 
62
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
losses of confidence or financial market stability that could materially weaken overall 
economic performance; and 
(v) The extent to which the institution has access to alternative sources of capital and 
liquidity, whether from the private sector or from other sources of government funds. 
(Ibid., 12/31/2008). 
In a later report by the Treasury on the Citigroup’s guarantee program, it noted the concern 
with Citigroup’s failure was that the loss of confidence in a financial institution could result 
in significant market disruptions that threaten the similarly situated financial institutions 
and thus impair broader financial markets, pose a threat to the overall economy, and could 
lead to “threaten the viability of otherwise financially sound businesses, institutions, and 
municipalities, resulting in spillovers on employment, output and incomes.” Additionally, 
extending the guarantee was part of a broader effort to support Citigroup as the company 
executes its restructuring plans (Section 129 EESA Report). 
Guarantee by the FDIC 
The FDIC once again r elied on the systemic risk exception under the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Act to share and “ring -fence losses” in selected assets of Citigroup. When the 
FDIC’s Board of Directors met to consider whether or not to recommend that the Treasury 
invoke the syste mic risk exception and allow the FDIC to participate in this open bank 
assistance, the FDIC staff recommended that the Board find that Citigroup’s failure would 
have serious adverse effects on domestic and international economic conditions and 
financial st ability. The FDIC’s Board unanimously voted to recommend that the Treasury 
invoke a systemic risk exception for Citigroup, thereby authorizing the FDIC’s participation 
in open bank assistance to Citigroup (SIGTARP 2011). 
While the vote by the FDIC Board to  invoke a systemic risk exception for Citigroup was 
unanimous, Director John M. Reich, an FDIC Board member, expressed the concern that there 
had been “some selective creativity exercised in the determination of what is systemic and 
what’s not,” and that there “has been a high degree of pressure exerted in certain situations, 
and not in others, and I’m concerned about parity.” In terms of Citigroup, an FDIC official said 
that the FDIC directors and other government entities “made a judgment call” (Ibid., 2011). 
Moreover, during the vote, the FDIC noted that this was “based largely on information from 
Citigroup’s primary regulators, the Federal Reserve Board and the Office of the Comptroller 
of the Currency.” Although the FDIC acknowledged that Citigroup’s fa ilure would have 
serious consequences for the functioning of the global payment system, Chairman Bair said, 
“We were told by the New York Fed that problems would occur in the global markets if Citi 
were to fail. We didn’t have our own information to verify this statement, so I didn’t want to 
dispute that with them” (Ibid., 2011).  
A couple of days before the vote by the FDIC, Treasury Secretary Paulson already had stated 
publicly that “If Citi isn’t systemic, I don’t know what is” (Geithner 2014). Secretary Paulson 
also consulted with President Bush about making an emergency systemic risk determination 
for five Citigroup subsidiary banks, which would then authorize the FDIC to take appropriate 
action under the systemic risk exception. “Citigroup’s failure wo uld threaten the viability of 
creditors and counterparties exposed to the institution, impair the liquidity of even well -
capitalized institutions, dislocate the credit markets, and undermine business and household 
confidence in the broader economy” (SIGTARP 2011). 
After the announcement of the guarantee program and when negotiating the specific terms 
of loss sharing and the guarantee, the FDIC maintained that Citigroup should take a first loss 
63
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 16 ---
position equal to 110% of the initial regulatory estimate of embedded cre dit losses (initial 
regulatory estimate was $37 billion), or $42 billion, before the FDIC would start to cover 
losses. This point was taken into consideration as the government parties discussed the 
structure and order of the government loss positions. FDI C stated that it found Citigroup’s 
ultimate first loss position of $37 billion acceptable because Treasury was willing to take a 
$5 billion second loss position through TARP (Ibid., 2011). 
Guarantee by the Federal Reserve 
The Federal Reserve relied on Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, before its 
amendment by the Dodd -Frank Act. It allowed the Federal Reserve, by the affirmative vote 
of not less than five members, to authorize any Federal Reserve bank, during such pe riods 
as said board may determine, to discount for any individual, partnership, or corporation, 
notes, drafts, and bills of exchange when such notes, drafts, and bills of exchange are 
indorsed or otherwise secured to the satisfaction of the Federal Reserve bank. In return the 
Federal Reserve bank obtained evidence that such individual, partnership, or corporation is 
unable to secure adequate credit accommodations from other banking institutions, and all 
such discounts were to be subject to limitations, restrictions, and regulations as the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve saw fit to prescribe.  
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve voted unanimously to recommend to the 
Secretary of the Treasury that a potential Citigroup failure posed a syste mic risk, and the 
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Bernanke said he believed that Citigroup’s underlying 
financial situation had not changed, but its biggest problems were credit and confidence. The 
FRBNY officials testified that this was similar to Lehman’s situation preceding its failure. The 
Federal Reserve acknowledged Citigroup’s systemic significance based on the following 
factors (SIGTARP 2011):  
(i) As of September 30, 2008, Citigroup, including its insured depository institution 
subsidiaries, was the  second-largest banking organization in the United States and 
had total consolidated assets of slightly more than $2 trillion. Citigroup held more 
than $794 billion of deposits at the end of the third quarter of 2008, making it one of 
the largest deposit h olders in the world. Citigroup held a large amount of foreign 
deposits and performed consumer banking across the globe in more than 100 
countries. It was the world’s largest provider of foreign currency exchange services 
and held large deposits for several Fortune 500 companies at the time; 
(ii) Citigroup was a major supplier of credit in the U.S. and abroad. At the time, it was 
the largest consumer finance lender in the world, the third-largest mortgage servicer, 
the fourth-largest student lender, and the world’s largest credit card lender;  
(iii) Citigroup provided a wide range of investment banking, capital markets, asset 
management, and retail brokerage services through its subsidiary Citigroup Global 
Capital Markets, Inc. Citigroup’s brokerage arm, Smith Barney, was one of the largest 
in the United States by the end of the third quarter of 2008; 
(iv) Citigroup was a major securitizer of credit and a major player in a wide range of 
derivatives markets, both as counterparty to over-the-counter trades and as a broker 
and clearing firm for trades on exchanges; and  
(v) Citigroup had significant amounts of commercial paper and long-term senior and 
subordinated debt outstanding, and was a major participant in numerous domestic 
and international payment, clearing, and central counterparty arrangements.  
64
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
The Federal Reserve especially noticed that Citigroup was one of the largest financial 
institutions in the U.S. and had extensive and diversified operations both in the U.S. and 
abroad (Section 129 EESA Report). I t believed that Citigroup ’s failure would have 
destabilized the global financial system by seriously impairing already disrupted credit 
markets, including short -term interbank lending, counterparty relationships in qualified 
financial contract markets, ban k and senior subordinated debt markets, and derivatives. 
Chairman Bernanke also believed at the time that Citigroup failure “would have been 
Lehman times two or three in terms of the financial sector and the economy” (SIGTARP 
2011). 
An FRBNY official also noted that the timing for the announcement of the guarantee program 
was crucial. In order to indicate to the global market that the U.S. government was 
guaranteeing Citigroup’s tail risk, or unknown losses, it was aiming to announce the program 
before the markets opened in Asia. According to the official, the term sheet worked by 
“convincing the skittish market that the Federal Government was taking the risk, even 
though the risk really remained with Citigroup,” because the Citigroup loss position was 
greater than anticipated losses. While the parties failed to meet that deadline, the 
announcement was made within hours of the opening of the Asian markets (Ibid,. 2011).   
The Federal Reserve Board, on the other hand, did not expect this program to generate any 
real losses for the Federal Reserve and the U.S. taxpayers since a substantial protection of 
loss was already provided by Citigroup, the Treasury, and the FDIC. Before any financing 
would be provided under the Federal Reserve facility, the three entities’ loss position would 
have to be exhausted first and any financing provided under its own facility would have had 
to be fully collateralized (Section 129 EESA Report). 
Assessment of the Program 
On November 24, 2008, the first trading day after the government announcement of the 
guarantee provided for Citigroup, several market indicators reversed their adverse trends 
from the previous week. For example, Citigroup’s stock price increased from $3.77 to $5.95 
a share, temporarily reversing the stock’s downward trend. At the same time, Citigroup’s 
credit default swap spread, or the price of insuring its debt, declined from 4.6% to 3.6% 
(SIGTARP 2011). 
However, not all governme nt participants were convinced that this proposed plan was 
sufficient to fix the problem with Citigroup. “I don’t think this [additional assistance] is going 
to fix Citi. And unless you figure out a way to stabilize the situation, we are going to be back 
in here writing more checks,” FDIC Chairman Bair noted during the FDIC Board systemic risk 
discussions about Citigroup on November 23, 2008. “We all need to be realistic about some 
of the underlying problems at this institution. It’s not just because the ma rket is having 
problems; this institution has some problems very specific to itself…We all need to work 
together on how we need to fix that.” In an email to Citigroup’s regulators on February 22, 
2009, Chairman Bair emphasized FDIC’s view that Citigroup re quired “greater senior 
management bank experience” and the need for management changes “at the top of the 
house” (Ibid., 2011). 
The study by the Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief 
Program (SIGTARP) established by EESA, observed that the conclusion of government actors 
to save Citigroup was strikingly ad hoc. It note d that the consensus that Citigroup was too 
systemically significant to be allowed to fail appeared to be based as much on gut instinct 
and fear of the unknown as on objective criteria.  
65
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 18 ---
On the other hand, SIGTARP f ound that the government constructed a plan that not only 
achieved the primary goal of restoring market confidence in Citigroup, but also carefully 
controlled the overall risk of government loss on the  asset guarantee. It acknowledged that 
the government drove a particularly hard bargain on behalf of taxpayers and the eventual 
selection of assets for inclusion in the pool was driven largely by government -imposed 
criteria. This included a take-it-or-leave-it proposal that required Citigroup to absorb the 
first $37 billion in losses in the asset pool as well as 10% of any losses in excess of that 
amount in return for approximately $7 billion in Citigroup preferred stock; and $20 billion 
capital injection in return for preferred stock, even though Citigroup did not request such an 
injection (Ibid., 2011). AGP is now closed and has so far resulted in a positive return of over 
$3 billion for the taxpayers (Treasury Webpage).  
  
66
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
References 
12 UCSC Section 343, before amended by the Dodd-Frank Act 
Amendment of the Debt Guarantee Program to Provide for the Establishment of a Limited 
Six-Month Emergency Guarantee Facility, 74 FR 54743, October 23, 2009  
Asset Guarantee Program, Treasury Webpage  
Chairman's Statement on the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program, October 23, 2008  
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, 110 P.L. 343,122 Stat. 3765, 2008 Enacted 
H.R. 1424, 110 Enacted H.R. 1424, §102 
Exchange Stabilization Fund, Resource Center, U.S. Department of Treasury 
Extraordinary Financial Assistance Provided to Citigroup, Inc., Office of the Special Inspector 
General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, January 13, 2011  
FDIC Announces Plan to Free Up Bank Liquidity, October 14, 2008   
Final Rule Regarding Amendment of the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program to Extend 
the Transaction Account Guarantee Program, 75 FR 36506, June 28, 2010  
Frequently Asked Questions About Treasury’s Temporary Guarantee Program for Money 
Market Funds, September 29, 2008, U.S. Department of Treasury  
Geithner, Timothy F. Stress Test: Reflections on Financial Crises, (2014) 
Guarantees and Contingent Payments in TARP and Related Programs , Congressional 
Oversight Panel, November Oversight Report, November 6, 2009 
Joint Statement by Treasury, Federal Reserve, and the FDIC on Citigroup, November 23, 2008   
Money Market Funds, SEC Webpage 
The Next Phase of Government Financial Stabilization and Rehabilitation Policies , U.S. 
Department of Treasury, September 2009  
Professional Money Fund Is Closed by Putnam, The New York Times, September 19, 2008  
Proposed Recommendations Regarding Money Market Mutual Fund Reform , Financial 
Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), November 2012 
Report Pursuant to Section 129 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008: 
Authorization to Provide Residual Financing to Citigroup, Inc. For a Designated Asset 
Pool Report to Congress Pursuant to Section 102 of the Emergency Economic 
Stabilization Act, U.S. Department of Treasury, December 31, 2008   
Reserve Primary Money Fund Falls Below $1 a Share (Update4) , Bloomberg, September 16, 
2008 
67
U.S. Guarantees During the Global Financial Crisis Rhee and Metrick

--- Page 20 ---
Secretary of the Treasury Timothy F. Geithner Written Testimony before the Congressional 
Oversight Panel, U.S. Department of Treasury, September 10, 2009  
Secretary Written Testimony before the House Committee on Oversight and Government 
Reform, U.S. Department of Treasury, January 27, 2010  
Section 131 of P.L. 110-343  
Statement by Federal Deposit Insurance  Corporation Chairman Sheila Bair , U.S. Treasury, 
Federal Reserve, FDIC Joint Press Conference, October 14, 2008  
Statement of Jason C. Cave, Deputy Director for Complex Financial Institutions Monitoring, 
Office of Complex Financial Institutions, Federal D eposit Insurance Corporation on 
the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program , Congressional Oversight Panel, 
Washington, D.C., March 4, 2011  
Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program, Final Rule, 12 CFR Part 370, Federal Register, Vol 
73, No. 229, Nov 26, 2008. 
Treasury Announces Expiration of Guarantee Program for Money Market Funds, September 
18, 2009, U.S. Department of Treasury  
Treasury Announces Extension of Temporary Guarantee , March 31, 2009, U.S. Department 
of Treasury  
Treasury Announces Extension of Temporary Guarantee Program for Money Market Funds, 
November 24, 2008, U.S. Department of Treasury  
Treasury Announces Guaranty Program for Money Market Funds , September 19, 2008, U.S. 
Department of Treasury  
Treasury to Guarantee Money Market Funds, The New York Times, September 19, 2008  
Treasury's Guarantee Program for Money Market Mutual Funds: What You Should Know , 
FINRA Investor Alert  
 
Development of this case has been supported by a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation to the Yale Program on Financial Stability. 
Copyright, 2015, 2020 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material 
or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale 
Program for Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
 
 
68
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1