--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 2 Issue 1 
2020 
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A: The Mexican Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A: The Mexican 
Peso Crisis of 1994-95 Peso Crisis of 1994-95 
Christian M. McNamara 
Yale School of Management 
June Rhee 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, International Economics Commons, 
International Law Commons, Public Administration Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public 
Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
McNamara, Christian M.; Rhee, June; and Metrick, Andrew (2020) "Restructuring and Forgiveness in 
Financial Crises A: The Mexican Peso Crisis of 1994-95," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 2 : Iss. 1, 82-95. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1052 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss1/6 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol2/iss1/6

--- Page 3 ---
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A:  
The Mexican Peso Crisis of 1994-951   
 
Christian M. McNamara2 
June Rhee3 
Andrew Metrick4 
 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 2015-4a-v3 
September 1, 2015 
Abstract 
Following a year in which repeated political turmoil sapped investor confidence in Mexico, 
putting pressure on the peso and draining the country’s foreign exchange reserves, on 
December 22, 1994 , the Mexican government sparked a financial crisis by unexpectedly 
abandoning its policy of anchoring the peso to the US dollar and instead allowing it to float 
freely. The resulting collapse of the peso left Mexico with $40 billion to $50 billion in external 
debt (much of it dollar-indexed) coming due in the near term and almost no foreign exchange 
reserves. Faced with the prospect that Mexico would either default on its obligations or 
impose exchange controls (with either sc enario being seen by many as likely to result in 
contagion), officials from both the US and abroad scrambled to craft a response to what had 
been dubbed “the first financial crisis of the twenty-first century” because of its origins in an 
emerging market e conomy within globalized financial markets.  On January 31, 1995, an 
assistance package comprised primarily of funds from the US and the IMF was announced.  
Backed by $20 billion from the US Treasury’s Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) and a $17.8 
billion st and-by arrangement from the IMF, Mexico met its immediate obligations, 
restructured short -term debt into longer -term debt , and implemented a strict economic 
reform plan. While the country experienced significant economic hardship in the immediate 
aftermath of the crisis, by 1996 -97 the economy had rebounded , and by 2000 Mexico had 
paid back all outstanding obligations under the assistance package.  
__________________________________________________________________ 
1  This case study is one of four Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) case modules considering 
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises. The others are:   
• Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises B: The Asian Crisis of 1997.  
• Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises C: The Swedish Banking Crisis of 1990 -94. 
• Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises D: The Japanese Financial Crisis of the 1990s.  
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises. 
2  Director, New Bagehot Project and Senior Editor , Yale Program on Financial Stability ( YPFS), Yale School of 
Management. 
3 Director, MMS in Systemic Risk  and Senior Editor, Yale Program on Financial Stability ( YPFS), Yale School of 
Management. 
4  Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management, and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of 
Management. 
82

--- Page 4 ---
1. Introduction  
Following a year in which repeated political turmoil sapped investor confidence in Mexico, 
putting pressure on the Mexican peso and draining the country’s foreign exchange reserves, 
on December 22, 1994, the Mexican government sparked a financial crisis by unexpectedly 
abandoning its policy of anchoring the peso to the US dollar and inst ead allowing it to float 
freely. This crisis represented a dramatic reversal for Mexico, which had emerged from a 
prior crisis in 1982 as what some considered a pioneer in strengthening its economy by 
transforming it along open, market -based lines.  Indeed, by the late 1980s the Mexican 
economy had largely moved beyond the 1982 crisis and had resumed economic growth. This 
growth was financed in significant part by foreign investment, and one of the cornerstones 
of Mexico’s economic policy during this period was an exchange rate system designed to 
stabilize the economy and create certainty for foreign investors.  
Beginning in 1988, Mexico established a fixed nominal exchange rate between the peso and 
the dollar.  Given the need for the peso to depreciate agains t the dollar to prevent real 
exchange rates from increasing, Mexico later modified this fixed rate to a “crawling peg” in 
1989 and a “moving band” in 1991.  Still, by 1994 many observers considered the peso 
overvalued. With a current account deficit of appr oximately 8% of GDP financed largely by 
short-term capital inflows and roiled by a series of uprisings and assassinations, Mexico 
experienced significantly weakened demand for peso assets.  In response, the country 
increasingly relied on the issuance of short-term dollar-indexed notes called tesobonos that 
shifted foreign exchange risk from investors to the government and left Mexico extremely 
vulnerable in the event of a devaluation of the peso. When a Zapatista uprising in Chiapas on 
December 19, 1994, brought matters to a head and gave the Mexican government no choice 
but to float the peso, the resulting collapse of the peso’s value left Mexico with $40 billion to 
$50 billion in external debt coming due in the near term and almost no foreign exchange 
reserves to satisfy these obligations.   
Faced with the prospect that Mexico would either default on its obligations or impose 
exchange controls (with either scenario being seen by many as likely to result in contagion), 
officials from both the US and abroad scrambled to craft a response to what had been dubbed 
“the first financial crisis of the twenty -first century” because of its origins in an emerging 
market economy within globalized financial markets. Despite roadblocks that included (i) an 
initial unwillingness by Mexico to turn to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for help 
given what it would signal about its newfound status among the world’s advanced 
economies, (ii) opposition from the United States Congress to any bailout and (iii) resistance 
from Eur opean finance ministers to the proposed extent of the IMF’s involvement, an 
assistance package comprised primarily of funds from the US and the IMF was announced 
on January 31, 1995.  Backed by $20 billion from the US Treasury’s Exchange Stabilization 
Fund (ESF) and a $17.8 billion stand -by arrangement from the IMF, Mexico met its 
immediate obligations, restructured short -term debt into longer -term debt and 
implemented a strict economic reform plan.  While the country experienced significant 
economic hardship in the immediate aftermath of the crisis, by 1996 -97 the economy had 
rebounded, and by 2000 Mexico had paid back all outstanding obligations under the 
assistance package. 
The remainder of the case is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the conditions that 
resulted in the Mexican peso crisis.  Section 3 provides an overview of the response to the 
crisis. Sections 4 and 5, in turn, provide more in -depth analysis of the use of the ESF by the 
United States and the use of a stand-by arrangement by the IMF, respectively. Finally, Section 
6 discusses the results produced by this assistance package.  
83
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Questions  
1. What situations leading up to the crisis were different/similar between the Mexican 
peso crisis and the Thai baht crisis, and how did these difference s/similarities affect 
the design of the response and intervention by the international community? 
 
2. Which interventions were effective, and what would each government do differently 
if it were faced with the same crisis now? 
 
3. What are the core factors to consider in designing interventions for future financial 
crises that are applicable across developed, developing, and emerging markets? 
2.  Background of the Crisis 
Following the successful resolution of a debt crisis that broke out in 1982, Mexico embarked 
on a program of economic reform that caused many to point to it as a model for the 
transformative effects of openness and economic liberalization.  From 1988 to 1993 the 
country pursued a strategy aimed at attaining external viability and layin g the foundations 
for private-sector-led growth based on tight financial policies, the use of the exchange rate 
as a nominal anchor, comprehensive structural reforms including privatization and trade 
and exchange liberalization, and a major restructuring o f external debt  (Camdessus 1995). 
Following nearly a decade of low growth and high inflation, Mexico’s GDP averaged 3.9% 
annual growth from 1989 to 1993, and its rate of inflation fell to single digits for the first 
time in over twenty years in 1993 (Ortiz Martinez 1998).   
One of the cornerstones of Mexico’s economic policy during this period was an exchange rate 
system designed to stabilize the economy and create certainty for foreign investors.  This 
system was the product of a series of agreements betwee n the government, labor , and 
business sector to foster social consensus on an evolving package of economic reforms.  
Known as the Pacto, these tripartite agreements had a stable exchange rate as their anchor, 
because the commitment to defend an exchange rat e requires prudence in monetary and 
fiscal policy (GAO 1996).  The exchange rate regime was thus intended to function as a 
disciplinary device for the country. 
Under the Pacto, in 1988 the Mexican government fixed the nominal exchange rate between 
the peso and the US dollar.  Because differing rates of inflation in the two nations required 
the peso to depreciate to prevent real exchange rates from increasing, in 1989 Mexico 
adopted a “crawling peg” system under which the exchange rate was adjusted daily to allow 
a slow rate of nominal depreciation of the peso to occur over time. In 1991, this system was 
abandoned in favor of a band within which the peso was allowed to fluctuate. The ceiling of 
the band was adjusted daily to permit further depreciation of the peso to occur (GAO 1996). 
With the Mexican economy seemingly poised for sustainable growth and a degree of foreign 
exchange certainty provided by Mexico’s exchange rate system, capital began to flow into the 
country at an unprecedented rate. From 1990 to 1994 Mexico attracted approximately $100 
billion in total capital, 20% of all capital flows to developing economies  (Ortiz Martinez 
1998). However, a significant portion of this capital was in the form of debt and equity 
portfolio investments that could be quickly withdrawn in the event of a loss of investor 
confidence (GAO 1996). In particular, a major opening of Mexico’s capital account in 1988 -
89 allowed foreign investors to acquire short -term domestic debt.  As shown in Figure 1  
below, the increase in cap ital inflows in the early 1990s was due almost entirely to rising 
84
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A McNamara et al.

--- Page 6 ---
levels of portfolio investment, with total debt and equity inflows dwarfing direct investment 
by 1992 and 1993. 
Figure 1: Capital Flows to Mexico 1990-94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Bank of Mexico. 
In addition to leaving Mexico vulnerable to a sudden reverse in investor sentiment, these 
short-term inflows helped to push the country’s external current account deficit as high as 
8% of GDP by 1994, which some saw as unsustainable. 
In parallel with these developments, the Mexican commercial banking system underwent 
privatization from 1990 onwards, a process that was characterized by what some have called 
a lack of adequate supervision and regulation.  The result was a dramatic, and some would 
argue reckless, expansion of credit that eventually resulted in a very weak banking system 
by 1993. With increased pressure on the peso (particularly in light of sharp increases in U.S. 
interest rates beginning in 1994), the Bank of Mexico faced the dilemma of potentially 
needing to raise interest rates to defend the peso yet being aware that doing so could 
devastate the weakened banking system (Carstens 2015).   
This tenuous situation was brought to a head by a series of political crises that roi led the 
country in 1994.  On March 23 rd, Mexican presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio was 
assassinated, triggering a significant drop in investor confidence.  As investors fled Mexican 
assets, the Bank of Mexico’s foreign exchange reserves fell from $ 24.4 billion at the end of 
March to $17.3 billion by the end of April  (GAO 1996).  In an attempt to reverse capital 
outflows, the Bank increased interest rates on short -term, peso -denominated Mexican 
government notes called “cetes” from 9% to 18%. Yet investors remained wary, as concerns 
about the possible need to devalue the peso kept them from holding peso -denominated 
assets even at higher interest rates.  In response, the Mexican government became 
increasingly reliant on the use of “tesobonos,” short -term notes payable in pesos like cetes, 
but with the crucial distinction of being dollar-indexed. This dollar-indexing had the effect of 
transferring the foreign exchange risk of these investments from investors to the Mexican 
government. As outstanding tesobon o obligations increased from $3.1 billion at the end of 
March to $29.2 billion in December, Mexico was left extremely vulnerable in the event of a 
devaluation of the peso (GAO 1996). 
Following a period of relative calm in which foreign exchange levels stabilized at around $17 
billion from late -April through the election of Ernesto Zedillo as President in August, fresh 
scandal again drove down investor confidence.  On September 28 th, Jose Francisco Ruiz 
85
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
Massieu, Secretary General of President -Elect Zedillo’s political party, was assassinated.  
Amid allegations of a government cover -up, investors again fled Mexican assets.  By 
November 18th, foreign exchange levels had fallen to $13 billion, putting renewed pressure 
on the peso.  In response, officials from the Ba nk of Mexico, the outgoing administration of 
President Salinas and the administration of President-Elect Zedillo met to discuss a potential 
devaluation of the currency, a move they ultimately rejected for fear that it would cause a 
loss of confidence and c redibility given repeated assurances from the Mexican government 
throughout 1994 that the peso would not be devalued (GAO 1996). 
On December 9, 1994 the Zedillo administration unveiled a proposed budget for 1995 that 
many observers dismissed as unrealistic . In large part this had to do with the budget 
assuming a significant increase in the current account deficit at a time when capital was 
fleeing the country.  This capital outflow continued as investors grew concerned about the 
new administration’s commitment to addressing the problems facing Mexico. Within a week 
of the budget being introduced, foreign exchange reserves had fallen below $10.5 billion  
(GAO 1996). 
Shortly thereafter, the situation reached a breaking point when on December 19 th an 
uprising by a Zapatista insurgency movement succeeded in seizing temporary control of 
several towns in the Chiapas region of Mexico.  With the further erosion of investor 
confidence that ensued, it became clear that the existing exchange rate could no longer be 
maintained given dwindling foreign reserves. On the night of the 19th the government called 
a meeting of its Pacto partners to discuss a proposal to float the peso.  Resistance to this 
proposal from the business sector resulted in an initial devaluation of 15% on December 20th 
rather than a free float.  But attempting to defend this new exchange rate cost the Bank of 
Mexico half of its remaining foreign exchange reserves in the space of two days, and on 
December 22nd the Mexican government allowed the peso to flo at (GAO 1996). As the peso 
continued to plummet in value through the end of the year, by early January 1995 it was 
determined that $40 billion to $50 billion in external debt was coming due in the near term 
and that the Bank of Mexico had almost no foreign exchange reserves remaining with which 
to meet these obligations (Boughton 2012). See Figure 2 below for a chart of Mexico’s foreign 
exchange reserves from December 1993 to December 1994. 
Figure 2: Mexico’s Foreign Exchange Reserves, December 1993-December 1994 
 
Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics.  
86
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A McNamara et al.

--- Page 8 ---
3.  The Response to the Crisis—Overview 
With the January 1, 1994, implementation of NAFTA, the economies of Mexico and the United 
States were becoming even more closely integrated than before at the time of the Mexican 
peso crisis. Already Mexico was the United States’ third -largest trading partner, accounting 
for appro ximately 10% of US exports and 8% of US imports in 1994  (GAO 1996).  The 
countries also share a border, with social problems in one nation often times spilling over 
into the other.  Summing up the interest many perceived the U .S. as having in Mexico’s 
continued economic stability, President Bill Clinton argued that “there [were] thousands of 
jobs, billions of dollars of American exports at stake, the potential of an even more serious 
illegal immigration problem, the spread of financial instability to other co untries in our 
hemisphere, and indeed to other developing countries throughout the world, and the 
potential of a more serious narcotics trafficking problem” (Clinton 1995). 
In addition to these linkages supporting active involvement by the U.S. in resolving Mexico’s 
crisis, Mexico itself may have been reluctant to turn to the broader international community 
for help.  Having joined the ranks of the world’s advanced economies through its 
participation in NAFTA and membership in the OECD, Mexico could well hav e wanted to 
avoid the stigma associated with having to borrow from the IMF. Indeed, IMF officials pushed 
Mexico to seek assistance through the IMF’s stand -by arrangement program as early as 
December 26, 1994, but it was not until more than two weeks later that the Mexican 
government agreed to do so after the flight from Mexican assets and the depreciation of the 
peso continued unabated (Boughton 2012).  
Perhaps not surprisingly then, early responses to the turmoil in the Mexican economy largely 
involved bil ateral arrangements between Mexico and the United States (and to a lesser 
extent, Canada). The day after the Colosio assassination in March 1994, the U.S. Treasury and 
the Federal Reserve announced the creation of a temporary $6 billion currency swap facility 
pursuant to which Mexico could exchange pesos for dollars for an agreed upon interest rate 
subject to a subsequent reversal of the transaction at the same exchange rate  (GAO 1996). 
After Mexico’s foreign exchange reserves fell by nearly 30% to $17.3 bi llion from the end of 
March to the end of April, this facility, along with a $1 billion swap facility with Canada, was 
made permanent (Ibid.).  
Following the December 22 nd peso float and the ensuing depreciation, on January 2, 1995 , 
the U.S. and Canada increased these swap facilities to $9 billion and $1.5 billion respectively 
as part of an $18 billion assistance package that also included $5 billion in loans from G -10 
central banks via the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and approximately $3 billion 
in loans from a syndicate of international banks (Boughton 2012). When it became clear that 
much more assistance was necessary, on January 12, 1995 , the U.S. announced a proposed 
plan pursuant to which it would guarantee up to $40 billion in new private sector loans to 
Mexico in exchange for a guarantee fee and above -market interest rates intended to limit 
Mexico’s use of the guarantee and encourage it to return to the p rivate capital markets as 
soon as possible  (GAO 1996). This proposed plan became the centerpiece of a $55 billion 
package that was being put together and that also included a projected $7.8 billion stand-by 
arrangement with the IMF (Boughton 2012). 
The proposed $40 billion guarantee required approval by Congress, however.  Despite the 
backing of President Bill Clinton and initial support from Congressional leaders, the 
guarantee faced mounting opposition from members of Congress who derided it as an 
attempt to bail out investors with taxpayer money.  By January 28 th, President Clinton was 
meeting with Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and other senior officials to develop 
alternatives in the event that the guarantee was rejected.  On January 30 th, Speaker of the 
87
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
House Newt Gingrich informed Clinton that he was abandoning legislation authorizing the 
guarantee in the face of certain defeat  (Boughton 2012). 
Recognizing the need to avoid submitting any plan to a hostile Congress, U .S. officials 
identified the ESF as a mechanism by which assistance could be provided to Mexico without 
Congressional approval. As described in greater detail below, the ESF is a currency reserve 
fund overseen by the Treasury Secretary and employed by the US government to stabilize 
foreign e xchange markets.  The legislation establishing the ESF authorizes the Treasury 
Secretary to use the fund as he or she considers necessary consistent with its aims.  The U.S. 
would thus be able to provide $20 billion in support to Mexico (the most the Treasury felt it 
could spare) independent of Congress, a plan that President Clinton endorsed on the night 
of January 30th after learning of the guarantee’s demise (Boughton 2012). 
With U.S. involvement in the rescue cut from $40 billion to $20 billion, key IMF o fficials felt 
pressure to attempt to restore the assistance package as close to the original amount as 
possible. Informed of the reduction on the morning of January 31 st, IMF Managing Director 
Michel Camdessus immediately devised a plan to increase the size of the IMF’s commitment 
from $7.8 billion to $17.8 billion  (Boughton 2012). When the IMF Board allowed Camdessus 
to publicly announce this proposed increase despite its having angered several European 
finance ministers, and the BIS agreed to increase its commitment to $10 billion, the financial 
assistance package for Mexico outlined by President Clinton on January 31 st amounted to 
$48.8 billion broken down as follows: 
• US - $20.0 billion 
• IMF - $17.8 billion 
• BIS - $10.0 billion5 
• Canada - $1.0 billion 
4.  The Response to the Crisis—The Exchange Stabilization Fund 
With the demise of the $40 billion guarantee proposal having made clear the need to develop 
a plan that would not require Congressional approval, US officials narrowed in on the ESF as 
a possible means for providing assistance to Mexico. Established by the Gold Reserve Act of 
1934, the ESF was created as a mechanism by which the US government could intervene in 
foreign exchange markets to influence curr ency exchange rates.  In furtherance of this 
mission, the ESF can be used to purchase or sell foreign currencies, to hold U.S. foreign 
exchange and Special Drawing Rights (SDR) assets and to provide financing to foreign 
governments. (US Treasury 2010).  The Gold Reserve Act, as subsequently amended, 
provides in part that “the Secretary [of the Treasury] …with the approval of the President, 
may deal in gold, foreign exchange, and other instruments of credit and securities the 
Secretary considers necessary.” The Act explicitly states that the ESF “is under the exclusive 
control of the Secretary.” (31 U.S.C. §5302). 
__________________________________________________________________ 
5 Because this $10 billion commitment from the BIS required Mexico to post an equivalent amount of liquid 
collateral and therefore could not be drawn upon as a practical matter, it is not treated in -depth here.  See 
Boughton 2012. 
88
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A McNamara et al.

--- Page 10 ---
The plan developed by Treasury Secretary Rubin and endorsed by President Clinton called 
for a commitment of $20 billion consisting of three parts:  (i) up to $9 billion in short -term, 
90-day currency swaps at the 91 -day Treasury bill rate; (ii) up to $20 billion [less amounts 
outstanding under (i) and (iii)] in medium-term, five-year currency swaps at a rate reflecting 
the credit risk cost for Mexico; and (iii) up to $20 billion [less amounts outstanding under (i) 
and (ii)] in guarantees of dollar-denominated debt issued by the Mexican government with 
a term up to 10 years  (GAO 1996). The availability of these funds was conditioned on strict 
compliance with certain economic, financial , and reporting requirements.  For example, no 
funds would be provided unless U .S. officials were satisfied that Mexico had adequate 
resources to ensure repayment.  To assist in making this determination, U .S. officials could 
require Mexico to provide certification of its financial records by indep endent public 
accountants. Additionally, Mexico was required to submit and update at least annually a 
financial plan. Each request for funds would then have to describe the intended use for the 
funds and how it was consistent with the plan. Mexico also agreed to adhere to the economic 
reform program adopted as part of its stand -by arrangement with the IMF, discussed in 
greater detail below (Ibid.).  
Although the ESF is under the exclusive control of the Treasury Secretary, the Treasury 
works closely with th e Federal Reserve on foreign exchange operations.  One way in which 
this manifests itself is the use of the Fed to warehouse currencies to supplement the U .S. 
dollar resources of the Treasury and the ESF for financing purchases of foreign currencies 
and related international operations.  The Mexican assistance package required the Fed to 
warehouse $20 billion in German marks and Japanese yen to support the intervention. A vote 
taken by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) on January 31 st–February 1 st to 
increase the Fed’s warehousing limit from $5 billion to $20 billion revealed that opposition 
to the Mexican rescue was not limited to Congress. Two of the twelve members of the FOMC 
voted against increasing the limit, citing an absence of information to ass ess whether 
developments in Mexico threatened U .S. financial stability and concerns that the Fed could 
not assist in providing intermediate to long -term financing to facilitate debt restructuring 
without compromising, or appearing to compromise, the indepe ndence of the monetary 
policy process (Federal Reserve 1995). 
With the role of the ESF historically centered around short-term interventions in support of 
a stable dollar, the proposed use of ESF funds to provide assistance to Mexico, especially in 
the for m of medium -term swaps and guarantees of debt with terms up to 10 years, 
represented a novel application of the program.  US officials were thus aware of a need to 
ensure that the plan was on solid legal footing. Prior to the execution of definitive agreements 
establishing the $20 billion package, the Treasury’s General Counsel prepared a legal opinion 
concluding that the proposed use of the ESF was lawful. Having reviewed this opinion at the 
General Counsel’s request, the Department of Justice (DOJ) shared in this conclusion. As the 
DOJ noted, the legislative history underlying the ESF makes clear that Congress intended 
“that the President and the Treasury Secretary should retain the flexibility to use the ESF, as 
they consider necessary, to respond promptly to sudden and unexpected international 
financial crises that undermine the global currency exchange system and jeopardize vital U.S. 
economic interests ” (DOJ 1995).  On February 21, 1995 , the U .S. entered into definitive 
agreements with Mexico establishing the $20 billion program.     
5.  The Response to the Crisis—The IMF Stand-By Arrangement 
Despite the reluctance of Mexican officials to turn to the IMF for assistance (likely owing to 
concerns about the stigma that would result), as it became increasingly clear that initial 
bilateral efforts with the United States were not succeeding in quelling the crisis , Mexico 
89
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
acceded to IMF prodding to request a stand -by arrangement.  As the IMF’s “workhorse 
lending instrument for emerging and advanc ed market economies,” the stand -by 
arrangement program had since its inception in 1952 been used time and again to meet the 
external financing needs of member countries in crisis (International Monetary Fund 2015). 
In exchange for funding, countries agreed to undertake economic reforms aimed at resolving 
the problems that created the need for funding in the first place. 
The importance that key IMF officials placed on the IMF’s involvement in any Mexican 
assistance package stemmed from their views on both th e potential threat that the crisis 
posed to other nations and the uniquely vital role they believed the organization could play 
in the rescue.  On this former point, the IMF identified three specific contagion risks.  First, 
that “self -fulfilling investor pe ssimism” could cause the withdrawal of funds from other 
nations, especially developing countries.  Second, that Mexico’s status as a pioneer in 
openness and economic liberalization could cause its collapse to discredit the entire financial 
globalization mov ement. Third, that economic growth could decline as a result of falling 
production and shrinking markets (Boughton 2012). 
With respect to the question of the IMF’s uniquely vital role, three elements also stood out 
to the IMF. First, other potential rescuers including the U.S. were unwilling to commit their 
own money without the IMF’s assurances that Mexico was implementing sound economic 
reforms, assurances that the IMF found it impossible to give after the crisis without direct 
involvement in its resoluti on. Second, particularly after the demise of the $40 billion U .S. 
guarantee, it would have been unlikely that an adequate amount of support could be secured 
without the IMF given the size of Mexico’s problem.  Third, despite Mexican fears of stigma, 
the IMF’s involvement could have a calming affect given the confidence of IMF senior 
management in the ultimate success of rescue efforts (Boughton 2012). 
Notwithstanding these rationales, even within the IMF there was no uniform agreement on 
its involvement.  In particular, the IMF’s European Executive Directors questioned how 
significant the contagion risk actually was  (Boughton 2012).  Despite these concerns, 
Managing Director Camdessus authorized his staff to pursue a $7.8 billion stand -by 
arrangement with Me xico subject to final Board approval.  This amount was already an 
exceptional commitment at three times Mexico’s IMF quota. When Camdessus subsequently 
sought to increase it to $17.8 billion, it became the largest commitment in IMF history to that 
point, bo th as a percentage of quota and in absolute terms  (Camdessus 1995).  To avoid 
straining the IMF’s resources, Camdessus proposed a “$10 billion –X” approach pursuant to 
which the IMF would seek to raise the additional $10 billion from other countries before 
ultimately funding however much of that amount remained outstanding  (Boughton 2012). 
This did little to assuage the concerns of the European Directors, whose skepticism of the 
contagion risk was now compounded by fears that the arrangement was excessively l arge 
and had the potential to weaken the IMF’s financial position.  Furthermore, there was a 
perception among some European Directors that the increase to $17.8 billion had been 
orchestrated with U.S. officials without consulting the Executive Board. When the Executive 
Board voted to approve the $17.8 billion stand -by arrangement on February 1 st, the 
Directors from Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland , and the UK abstained in 
protest (Boughton 2012). 
The approved stand -by arrangement was an 18 -month agreement that called for the 
immediate distribution of the initial $7.8 billion amount, itself an exceptional step given the 
IMF’s typical practice of disbursing funds more gradually over the lifetime of the 
arrangement. Further installments would be pai d out over time contingent on Mexico’s 
adherence to an economic reform program developed in consultation with the IMF.  The 
specific near -term objectives of this program were two -fold: reduce the external current 
account deficit from 8% of GDP in 1994 to 4% of GDP in 1995 and lower the annualized rate 
90
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A McNamara et al.

--- Page 12 ---
of inflation to approximately 9% in the fourth quarter of 1995 from more than 30% in the 
first quarter of the year.  To achieve these objectives the program called for (a) fiscal 
tightening; (b) a policy on wage s and prices that implied a significant reduction in average 
real wages and a contribution on the part of labor to set the basis for resumption of economic 
growth; and (c) a credit policy that placed a limit on the growth of net domestic assets of the 
Bank of Mexico and reduced the rate of credit expansion by the development banks.  
Moreover, Mexico would expand its previous privatization efforts to include basic 
infrastructure such as rails, ports, airports, electricity generation, and radio and 
telecommunications. The proceeds from the privatization of these activities were to be used 
for paying off public external debt (International Monetary Fund 1995a). 
6.  The Outcome of the Response 
The introduction of the $20 billion in ESF funds and the $17.8 billion  IMF stand -by 
arrangement did not immediately reverse the capital outflow from Mexico or the further 
weakening of the peso.  As shown in Figure 3 below, from the time that the IMF stand -by 
arrangement was approved in early February and the U.S. entered into definitive agreements 
for the ESF funds in mid -February, the peso continued to fall from approximately 5.5 pesos 
per dollar to almost 7.5 pesos per dollar in early March (Boughton 2012). 
Figure 3: Mexican Exchange Rate 1994-95 
 
 
Source: Boughton 2012. 
Some were convinced that the Mexican rescue had failed, and Larry Summers, one of the 
architects of the U .S.’s involvement, is reported to have offered to resign his position as 
Undersecretary of International Affairs (Boughton 2012).  
91
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
The situation did not begin to improve until Mexico undertook a further strengthening of the 
economic reform program adopted as part of the rescue.  On March 9 th the Mexican 
government announced several measures developed in consultation with the IM F which 
when combined were projected to yield 1.5% of GDP. These included “substantial increases 
in prices charged by public enterprises, a rise in the value -added tax rate, and expenditure 
reductions” (International Monetary Fund 1995b).  Additionally, a f urther reduction in 
development bank lending was announced. 
The response to this development was enthusiastic. The IMF put out a press release praising 
the new measures and the peso appreciated 18% against the dollar on March 10th (Boughton 
2012). This strengthening held for the next several months, and by May 1995 Mexico was 
again able to access the international capital markets with a series of transactions in which 
it sold bonds with maturities of one to two years at interest rates of LIBOR plus 3% to 6% . 
(GAO 1996 ). Mexico also continued receiving funds under the ESF and stand -by 
arrangement, with the later providing installments of $2 billion and $1.7 billion in June and 
August after the initial $7.8 billion installment in February. 
By October, however, fresh concerns about Mexico’s political and economic stability had 
prompted new capital outflows that put downward pressure on the peso.  As seen in Figure 
3 above, the exchange rate reached an all-time low for the crisis at almost 8 pesos per dollar. 
On December 15, 1995, nearly one year after the outbreak of the crisis, Mexico requested a 
fourth installment under the stand-by arrangement, primarily as a means of demonstrating 
continued IMF confidence in the country  (Boughton 2012). This $1.7 billion disbursement 
would prove to be the last requested by Mexico under the stand -by arrangement, as 
continued financial strengthening in 1996 ultimately resulted in the resumption of economic 
growth. 
 
Figure 4: Mexico’s Annual GDP Growth Rate 1994-2000 
 
http://www.tradingeconomics.com/. 
92
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A McNamara et al.

--- Page 14 ---
As shown in Figure 4 below, after a significant contraction of the Mexican economy in 1995, 
by 1996 the economy was again growing and would remain so through the end of the decade. 
Unemployment, which peaked at 7.6% in Augu st 1995, fell to 3.5% by February 1998.  
Inflation declined from 52% in 1995 to 16% in 1997 (Ortiz Martinez 1998). 
All told, Mexico borrowed a total of approximately $28 billion in 1995 as part of its rescue, 
including approximately $13 billion from each of the IMF and the U .S. (Boughton 2012). In 
the case of the U .S., this borrowing primarily took the form of medium -term swaps (GAO 
1996). In January 1997, Mexico announced its intention to pay off the remaining balance of 
$3.5 billion owed to the U.S. under the rescue package (International Monetary Fund 1997). 
By August 2000, Mexico had repaid all amounts owed to the IMF under the $17.8 billion 
stand-by arrangement and a subsequent July 1999 $4.8 billion stand-by arrangement put in 
place to ensure sta bility in the run -up to presidential elections in July 2000.  This marked 
what some describe as the successful conclusion to the crisis (Boughton 2012).   
93
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
References 
Boughton, James M. 2012. “Tequila Hangover: The Mexican Peso Crisis and Its Aftermath.” In 
Tearing Down Walls:  The International Monetary Fund 1990 -1999 Chapter 10.  
International Monetary Fund. (Boughton 2012) 
Camdessus, Michel.  1995. “Drawing Lessons from the Mexican Crisis: Preventing and 
Resolving Financial Crises —the Role of the IMF.”  Address at the 25th Washington 
Conference of the Council of the Americas on "Staying the Course: Forging a Free Trade 
Area in the Americas." May 22. (Camdessus 1995) 
Carstens, Agustín. 2015. “Lessons from the 1994 -1995 Mexican Crisis.”  Presentation at the 
Yale Financial Crisis Forum. August. (Carstens 2015) 
Clinton, William J. 1995. Remarks to the National Governors’ Association Conference. January 
31. (Clinton 1995) 
The Federal Reserve Board. 1995. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting 
of January 31-February 1, 1995.” (Federal Reserve 1995) 
The Gold Reserve Act of 1934, as amended, 31 U.S.C. § 5302. (31 U.S.C. §5302) 
International Monetary Fund.  1995. “IMF Approves US$17.8 Billion Stand -By Credit for 
Mexico.” International Monetary Fund Pres s Release No. 95/10 . February 1.  
(International Monetary Fund 1995a)  
_______________. 1995. “IMF Welcomes New Mexican Economic Measures.”  International 
Monetary Fund News Brief No. 95/8. March 10. (International Monetary Fund 1995b)  
_______________. 1997. “Camdessus Welcomes Advance Repayment of Loans by Mexico, Positive 
Developments in Mexican Economy.”  International Monetary Fund News Brief No. 
97/1. January 15. (International Monetary Fund 1997) 
_______________. 2015. “IMF Stand -By Arrangement.”  IMF Fact Sheet . April. (International 
Monetary Fund 2015) 
Ortiz Martinez, Guillermo. 1998. “What Lessons Does the Mexican Crisis Hold for Recovery 
in Asia?” Finance & Development. Vol. 35, No. 2. June. (Ortiz Martinez 1998) 
United States Department of Justice. 1995. “Use of the Exchange Stabilization Fund to 
Provide Loans and Credits to Mexico.”  Memorandum Opinion for the General Counsel 
Department of the Treasury, Office of Legal Counsel. March. (DOJ 1995) 
United States Department of the Treasury.  2010. “Exchange Stabilization Fund.” December. 
(US Treasury 2010) 
United States General Accounting Office.  1996. “Mexico’s Financial Crisis: Origins, 
Awareness, Assistance, and Initial Efforts to Recover .” Report to the Chairman, 
Committee on Banking and Financial Services House of Representatives . February. 
(GAO 1996) 
 
94
Restructuring and Forgiveness in Financial Crises A McNamara et al.

--- Page 16 ---
Development of this case has been supported by a generous grant from the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation to the Yale Program on Financial Stability. 
Copyright 2015, 2020 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material 
or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale 
Program for Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
 
 
95
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1