--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 2 Issue 3 
2020 
Sweden's Guarantee Scheme (Sweden GFC) Sweden's Guarantee Scheme (Sweden GFC) 
Lily S. Engbith 
Yale School of Management 
Kevin Kiernan 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Growth and 
Development Commons, Macroeconomics Commons, Political Economy Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Engbith, Lily S. and Kiernan, Kevin (2020) "Sweden's Guarantee Scheme (Sweden GFC)," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 2 : Iss. 3, 911-926. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1094 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss3/47 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol2/iss3/47

--- Page 3 ---
Swedish Guarantee Scheme 1 
 
Lily Engbith  2 
Kevin Kiernan 3 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
January 16, 2019; Revised Date: October 10, 2020 
 
Abstract 
Although Sweden was not as directly impacted by the Global Financial Crisis  as some other 
economies, Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy on September 15, 2008, prompted Swedish authorities to 
take preemptive measures to protect domestic banks and financial institutions. One such program, 
announced on October 20, 2008 , and implemented on October 29, 2008, was designed to preserve 
credit extension to businesses and households  through what became known as the Swedish 
Guarantee Scheme. Per the terms of the Scheme, new short- and medium-term debt of maturities 
ranging from 90 days to five years issued by eligible banks would be guaranteed by t he Swedish 
government in exchange for a fee based on the maturity of the guaranteed debt and the risk profile 
of the issuing institution . The Scheme would be  funded by a more general stabilization fund  and 
initially capped at a maximum of SEK 1500 billion ($195.1 billion). Peak utilization reached SEK 354 
billion in 2009. None of the six participating institutions experienced defaults. The issuance window 
for the program expired on June 30, 2011, and all outstanding debt had matured by May 13, 2015.  
Keywords: Sweden, medium-term debt, government guarantee  
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering the responses to the global financial crisis that pertain to bank debt guarantee programs. 
Cases are available from the Journal o f Financial Crises  at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal -of-
financial-crises/. 
2 Lily Engbith—Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
3 Kevin Kiernan—Research Intern, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
911

--- Page 4 ---
At a Glance  
The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in 
September 2008  roiled global financial 
markets and threatened to interrupt the flow of 
credit even in countries far removed from the 
subprime mortgage market , such as Sweden. 
Swedish authorities feared that this turbulence 
in financial markets would have negative 
effects on the real economy by impeding the 
flow of credit to households and businesses. In 
order to keep credit flowing, the Swedish 
Guarantee Scheme ( “the Guarantee Scheme”) 
was established in October 2008 by the 
Swedish Government, based on emergency 
legislation passed by the parliament. The 
Scheme granted the Swedish National Debt 
Office (SNDO) a mandate to guarantee up to 
SEK 1500 billion ($195.1 billion) of short- and 
medium-term debt securities  with maturities 
ranging from 90 days to five years  issued by 
eligible institutions . This guarantee would be 
provided in exchange for a fee based on the 
maturity of the guaranteed debt and the risk 
profile of the issuing institution.  
The Guarantee Scheme reached peak 
utilization of SEK 354 billion  in the middle of 
2009, with guaranteed i ssuances trailing off 
over the following year. 
Summary Evaluation 
The Swedish Guarantee Scheme is seen as having been successful in fulfilling its purpose of ensuring 
the continued extension of credit in Sweden.  The Guarantee Scheme was especially useful f or 
Swedbank AB, which was one of the largest Swedish banks in the country and had at one point issued 
90 percent of outstanding guaranteed bonds. The program returned surplus participation payments 
of SEK 6 billion to the stabilization fund.  
 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: To preserve credit extension to Swedish 
households and businesses by allowing banks and 
credit institutions to issue debt securities with 
government guarantees and thereby meet their 
short- and medium-term funding needs  
Announcement Date  October 20, 2008 
Operational Date October 29, 2008 
Date of First Guaranteed 
Loan Issuance 
Not announced 
Issuance Window 
Expiration Date 
Originally April 30, 
2009, later extended to 
June 30, 2011 
Program Size Originally SEK 1500 
billion ($195.1 billion), 
later reduced to SEK 
750 billion 
Usage  SEK 354 billion by six 
Swedish financial 
institutions at peak  
Outcomes No defaults; SEK 6 
billion in fees generated 
Notable Features Certain restrictions 
(capital requirements 
and caps on growth for 
participating firms) 
relaxed over time to 
encourage participation 
The Swedish Guarantee Scheme 
912
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Swedish Guarantee Scheme:  Sweden Context 
GDP 
(SAAR, Nominal 
GDP in LCU 
converted to USD) 
$492.5 billion equivalent in 2007 
$523.9 billion equivalent in 2008 
 
Source: Bloomberg 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, Nominal 
GDP in LCU 
converted to USD) 
$53,700 equivalent per capita in 2007 
$56,153 equivalent per capital in 2008 
 
Source: Bloomberg 
Sovereign credit 
rating (5-year 
senior debt) 
As of Q4, 2007: 
 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
 
As of Q4, 2008 
 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
 
Source: Bloomberg 
Size of banking 
system 
$569.2 billion in total assets in 2007 
$655.5 billion in total assets in 2008 
 
Source: Bloomberg 
913
Swedish Guarantee Scheme Engbith and Kiernan

--- Page 6 ---
Size of banking 
system as a 
percentage of GDP 
115.6% in 2007 
125.1% in 2008 
 
Source: Bloomberg 
Size of banking 
system as a 
percentage of 
financial system 
No data available for 2007/2008 
 
Source: World Bank Global Financial Development 
Database 
5-bank 
concentration of 
banking system 
98.5% of total banking assets in 2007 
98.5% of total banking assets in 2008 
 
 Source: World Bank Global Financial Development 
Database 
Foreign 
involvement in 
banking system 
0% of total banking assets in 2007 
0% of total banking assets in 2008 
 
Source: World Bank Global Financial Development 
Database 
Government 
ownership of 
banking system 
0% of banks owned by the state in 2008 
 
Source: World Bank Global Financial Development 
Database 
Existence of 
deposit insurance 
100% insurance on deposits up to $36,818 
 
Source: Financial Crisis: Deposit Insurance and 
Related Financial Safety Net Aspects, OECD 
 
  
914
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
In the fall of 2008, turbulence in global financial markets caused by difficulties in the U.S. housing 
market began to threaten financial stability in Sweden. Although Swedish firms had largely avoided 
exposure to subprime mortgage -backed securities that had contributed to the  failure of Lehman 
Brothers in September 2008, they were nonetheless impacted by the ensuing credit crunch.  
The Swedish authorities feared that the turbulence in financial markets would affect the Swedish real 
economy if banks’ inability to meet their short- and medium-term funding needs were to negatively 
affect the aggregate amount of credit extended to firms and households. Based on legislation brought 
through the parliament under emergency procedures, the Government was granted far -reaching 
powers to deal with the crisis and its consequences for the Swedish financial sector.  
Program Description 
In response to the reduction in the availability of credit, the Government introduced on October 20, 
2008, the Government Guarantees to Banks and Others Ordinance (2008:819) under the purview of 
the Government Support to Credit Institutions Act (2008:814). The Ordinance gave the power to 
issue guarantees to the Swedish National Debt Office (SNDO), which in turn issued the SNDO 
Regulations (2008:1 and 2008:2).4 
In order to increase the supply of lending to homes and businesses, the Swedish Guarantee Scheme 
(“the Guarantee Scheme”) allowed qualifying institutions to issue certain debt instruments with a 
government guarantee. This allowed banks and credit institutions to meet their short and medium-
term funding requirements.  The Guarantee Scheme, like other Swedish interventions, would be 
funded by a new government-backed stabilization fund introduced in the Act. Reserves drawn from 
the fund would be repaid using interest and  fee payments accrued in association with the 
interventions. 
Effective October 29, 2008, the Guarantee Scheme was initially designed to allow issuances until April 
30, 2009. The SNDO, with the approval of the European Commission and in accordance with EU State 
aid rules, amended the program several times to ultimately extend its issuance window through June 
30, 2011. The government’s guarantee commitments were initially capped in the Ordinance decided 
 
4 The Swedish National Debt Office can be thought of as a combined equivalent of the FDIC and Treasury. It was 
established by King Gustav III in 1789 to finance the War against Russia. Today, it operates under the Swedish 
Ministry of Finance and Government. According to its website, the SNDO’s main responsibilities include:  
“-providing banking services for the central government 
-raising loans and managing central government debt 
-providing state guarantees and loans 
-being responsible for the deposit insurance and investor protection schemes 
-managing government support for banks” (“The Debt Office”).  
 
915
Swedish Guarantee Scheme Engbith and Kiernan

--- Page 8 ---
by the Government  at SEK 1500 billion ($195.05 billion)5, of which a maximum of SEK 500 billion 
could apply to covered bonds with maturities between three and five years. Sweden subsequently 
reduced these amounts to SEK 750 billion and SEK 250 billion in connection with an extension of the 
Guarantee Scheme into 2011. In addition, there were limits placed on the amount that could be 
guaranteed at any single institution determined by the total amount of maturing debt securities and 
the level of public deposits held by the institution in September 2008.  
The Guarantee Scheme was designed to assist banks and credit  institutions incorporated and 
operating in Sweden (including Swedish subsidiaries of foreign establishments), as these institutions 
were most likely to provide credit to Swedish households and firms  (European Commission 2010). 
Select lenders targeting local government organizations were also include d. Additionally, because 
there were no c urrency restrictions imposed, debt denominated in currencies other than SEK was 
eligible. To qualify for a State guarantee under the program, banks and lending institutions had to 
meet strict capital adequacy requirements  in order to prove their solvency (European Commission 
2008). The original terms of the Guarantee Scheme required Tier 1 capital of at least 6 percent and 
combined Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital reserv es of at least 9 percent. These regulations were loosened 
somewhat in an April 2009 amendment to the initial terms to require only the minimum capital 
reserve requirement of 8 percent (European Commission 2008).  
The Guarantee Scheme applied to short- and medium-term debt (including senior and covered bonds, 
certificates of deposits, and other debt securities not subordinated) with maturities between 90 days 
and three years, or maturities between 90 days and five years in the case of covered bonds. In April 
2009 Swedish authorities amended the Guarantee Scheme to enable non -collateralized debt with 
maturities over three years to be eligible as well. Only debt issued after an express approval by the 
SNDO was eligible to be guaranteed under the Scheme. In addition, complex structured products, 
such as index share bonds and guaranteed equity bonds, or instruments that qualified as either Tier 
1 or Tier 2 capital, were not eligible for coverage under the Guarantee Scheme  (European 
Commission 2008). 
In exchange for a participation fee that varied based on an individual institution’s specific risk 
(assessed using market data from before the crisis; see Key Design Decision 11) and the maturity of 
the debt to be issued, guaranteed securities received triple-A ratings from the major rating agencies 
based on the rating of the Kingdom of Sweden. They were also treated as government bonds by the 
Riksbank lending facilities. In the event that an issuer participating in the Guarantee Scheme failed 
to pay amounts due to its lenders, the government could be “called upon within three days if nothing 
else is agreed” (Grunnesjö and Wallenborg 2009).  
The conditions for acceptance into the Guarantee Scheme included limits on the compensation of the 
five highest -paid e mployees at any firm seeking admission. These terms eliminated bonuses and 
stock options payable to senior officers and limited the fixed pay and severance packages that they 
could receive. Restrictions were also placed on compensation for Board members at  guaranteed 
institutions (European Commission 2008).  
 
5 In October 2008, $1.00 = approximately SEK 7.69.  
916
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
In addition to the limitations on senior officer and Board compensation, participating firms faced 
prohibitions and restrictions aimed at reducing the potential for profiting excessively as a result of 
the Guarantee Scheme. Moreover, participation in the Scheme could not be used in the marketing of 
the firm. Furthermore, as specified in the original terms of the Scheme, institutions were prohibited 
from expanding their operations beyond the pace which would have been possible prior to receiving 
government support. 
This last condition for p articipation was retracted in an amendment on January 29 , 2009 , as 
institutions were reluctant to participate in the Scheme given the restrictions (European Commission 
2009). 
Outcomes 
Over the course of its implementation, six Swedish financial institutions 6 issued debt under the 
guarantee program. Peak utilization reached SEK 354 billion of debt issued in mid -2009. Over 75 
percent of the guarantees were issued in foreign currencies, primarily in U.S. dollars and euros  
(European Commission 2010).  
After June 30, 2011, no additional debt issuance was guaranteed under the Guarantee Scheme. By 
design, outstanding guaranteed debt had maturities extending past the end of the Scheme. The SNDO 
was never required to fulfill obligations on any of the guaranteed debt, a ll of which had matured by 
May 13, 2015. All in all, the SNDO recorded a SEK 6 million surplus from participation fees (“Swedish 
guarantee programme for banks concluded”).  
II. Key Design Decisions 
1.  The Guarantee Scheme was implemented as part of a package of stabilization measures 
taken by the Swedish authorities during the Global Financial Crisis.  
The dual purpose  of these measures was to restore confidence and encourage healthy interbank 
lending through the provision of liquidity ( European Commission 2008).  Included in the series of 
new programs were a new deposit guarantee program  that had a higher maximum ceiling and 
covered all deposits, a recapitalization scheme in which the Swedish government could inject capital 
if a new capital investment was at least 30% private capital, and a state-backed stabilization fund to 
finance the interventions.  
2. Following emergency legislation by the parliament, the Guarantee Scheme was authorized 
by the Kingdom of Sweden under Ordinances (2008:814) and (2008:819) on State 
Guarantees for Banks and further specified in the Swedish National Debt Office’s 
Regulations (2008:1) and (2008:2) concerning State Guarantees for Banks. 
These measures formed the legal basis for the Guarantee Scheme.  
 
6 Swedbank AB; Swedbank Hypotek AB; Sveriges Bostadsfinansieringsaktiebolag, SBAB ; Volvofinans Bank AB; 
Carnegie Investment Bank AB; and Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB. 
917
Swedish Guarantee Scheme Engbith and Kiernan

--- Page 10 ---
3. The Guarantee Scheme was also approved for implementation by the European 
Commission in accordance with State aid rules. 
As discussed in more detail below, the need to structure the Guarantee Scheme in such a way as to 
ensure EC approval significantly influenced the design of certain program features. 
4. Initially, up to SEK 1500 billion could be guaranteed under the program. 
Swedish authorities subsequently reduced this amount to SEK 750 billion in connection with 
extending the Guarantee Scheme into 2011, given a desire to gradually phase out support to promote 
institutions’ return to market financing. 
5. The Guarantee Scheme was to be funded out of a stabilization fund established by Swedish 
authorities to fund interventions to support the banking system.   
With the implementation of measures to support the Swedish banking  sector in October of 2008, 
Swedish authorities established a stabilization fund to finance the program of government 
interventions, including any calls to honor guarantees under the Guarantee S cheme. Any support 
recovered from support measures would be paid back into the fund. In addition, banks and other 
credit institutions would be required to pay an annual stabilization fee to the fund which would be 
an amount proportional to the size of the institution’s balance sheet. The stabilization fund was 
seeded with an initial government appropriation of SEK 15 billion and was intended to amount to 
about 2.5 percent of GDP. 
6.  Eligibility for the Scheme was restricted to Swedish banks and credit institutions, as well 
as select lenders who provided credit to local governments , which met certain 
capitalization and solvency requirements.  
The goal of the Guarantee Scheme was to ensure the continued extension of credit to Swedish 
households and businesses, as well as to municipal governments. Therefore, to be eligible to 
participate in the Scheme, an institution had to either be incorporated in Sweden or a Swedish 
subsidiary of a foreign institution. In addition, firms had to demonstrate that the y engaged in 
considerable lending on the Swedish Market (Riksgälden 2010).  
In addition to being Swedish institutions active in lending to businesses and households, 
participating firms were required by the Swedish National Debt Office to meet certain capi tal 
requirements. The first version of the terms, passed in October 2008, called for a capital requirement 
of 6 percent Tier 1 capital and 9 percent combined Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital. This condition was 
relaxed in an amendment dated April 28, 2009, to the law, resulting in a requirement of only 8 percent 
combined Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital.  
7.  New short- and medium-term debt, including senior and covered bonds , certificates of 
deposits, and other unsubordinated debt securities were eligible for guarantees.  
Coverage under the Guarantee Scheme applied only to new debt issued after the issuing institution 
had been approved for participation in the program by the SNDO. 
918
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
Additionally, subordinated bonds, complex structured products —such as index share bonds and 
guaranteed equity bonds—or instruments that qualified as either Tier 1 or Tier 2 capital, were not 
eligible for coverage under the Guarantee Scheme (European Commission 2008). 
In seeking and obtaining approval from the European Commission for the inclusion of covered bonds, 
Swedish authorities specifically cited the example of Denmark, where the non -inclusion of covered 
debt in a guarantee program was seen as resulting in the drying up of that market. With over 80% of 
Swedish housing loans packaged into covered bonds, Swedish authorities argued that the continued 
functioning of the covered bond market was essential to Sweden’s financial system as a whole. To 
limit the potential for distortion resulting from longer guarantees for covered bonds, Swe dish 
authorities agreed to restrict  the amount of the guarantee available for covered bonds with 
maturities of three years to five years to one-third the overall total, or SEK 500 billion (later reduced 
to SEK 250 billion with the reduction in the overall Guarantee Scheme from SEK 1500 billion to SEK 
750 billion) (European Commission 2008). 
Swedish authorities designated debt guaranteed under the Guarantee Scheme  as eligible collateral 
for Riksbank liquidity facilities.  
8. Initially, debt ranging in maturity from 90 days to three years could be issued under the 
Guarantee Scheme (five years in the case of covered bonds). 
Since the Scheme was designed to help firms meet their short- and medium-term funding needs, all 
instruments covered under the Guarantee Scheme were of maturities between 90 days and five years. 
As such , it was a complement to extraordinary liquidity support measures introduced by the 
Riksbank. These measures  initially had a maximum maturity of 90 days but were subs equently 
extended to one year. Initially, most debt instruments covered under the guarantee were required to 
have maturities between 90 days and three years; only covered bonds were permitted to have  
maturities extending out to five years. An April 2009 amendment to the Guarantee Scheme enabled 
even uncollateralized debt to have maturities greater than three years. Debt with maturities greater 
than three years was limited to one-third of the overall Guarantee Scheme amount.  
9.  All currencies were eligible. 
As a practical matter, because most maturing debt was denominated in U.S. dollars and euros, these 
are the currencies that ended up being heavily represented among guaranteed debt.  
10.  The Swedish government imposed caps on individual firms’ eligibility based on maturing 
debts and public deposits.  
For each financial institution, individual guarantee caps were determined and imposed according to 
the maximum of either:  
1. The sum of that institution’s debt instruments maturing after September 1, 2008 , but prior 
to April 30, 2009, and which had maturities longer than 90 days; OR  
2. 20 percent of that institution’s public deposits as of September 1, 2008  (European 
Commission 2008).  
919
Swedish Guarantee Scheme Engbith and Kiernan

--- Page 12 ---
The second option was added to avoid distortions between banks that had been issuing securities 
and those that relied solely on deposit funding. 
A January 2009 amendment to the Guarantee Scheme enabled these calculations to be performed at 
the group level. The overall amount of guaranteed debt would remain the same as if the calculations 
had been performed at the level of individual institutions, but groups would have greater flexibility 
in how their allocations were distributed among the members of the groups. 
11. The fee for issuing debt pursuant to the Guarantee Scheme varied based on the soundness 
of the issuing institution and the maturity of the debt guaranteed.  
The “Recommendations on Government Guarantees on Bank Debt,” set forth on October 20, 2008, by 
the European Central Bank, provided guidance on the approach to fees to be adopted by European 
countries introducing bank debt guarantees. Sweden’s fees were consistent with this guidance. 
Fees for individual institutions were assessed according to a measure of the institution’s specific risk, 
plus an additional fixed amount of 50 basis points.  
a) “For credit guarantees on bank debt with maturities of less than or equal to 1 year , the fee 
would be equal to 0.5% on an annual basis. In these cases, an assessment of the institution’s 
risk would not be taken into account.  
b) For Credit guarantees with maturity longer than 1 year:  
• For banks with CDS data, the price should equal the median 5 -year CDS spread over the 
period 1 January 2007 to 31 August 2008 (the first criterion), plus 0.5% on an annual 
basis (the second criterion).  
• For banks without CDS data,  or representative CDS data, but with a credit rating, an 
equivalent CDS spread should be derived from the median value of 5 -year CDS spreads 
during the above mentioned period for the rating category of the banks concerned, based 
on a representative sample of euro area large banks (the second criterion remains 
unchanged).  
• For banks without CDS data and without a credit rating, an equivalent CDS spread should 
be derived from the median value of 5 -year CDS spreads over the same period for the 
lowest rating category (the second criterion remains unchanged).  
• For guarantees for covered bonds the second criterion, the add-on fee will be set to 0.25 
% on an annual basis (the first criterion remains unchanged).” 
This pricing structure would remain constant until April 30, 2009, but could be altered in the event 
that the SNDO granted an extension of the Guarantee Scheme  (European Commission 2008). Per a 
June 2010 amendment to the Guarantee Scheme, fees were increased by 20bps to 40bps  consistent 
with guidance from the European Commission on guarantee programs being extended beyond June 
30, 2010. The purpose of this fee increase was to bet ter reflect market conditions and to encourage 
participants to shift to non-guaranteed issuance as conditions allowed.  
920
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
12.  Initially t he SNDO set limits on growth for institutions participating in the Guarantee 
Scheme, but this condition was ultimately repealed.  
Guidance issued by the European Commission in October 2008 on the creation of credit guarantee 
programs called for the inclusion in programs of a set of safeguards “to minimize…distortions and 
the potential abuse of the preferential situations of beneficiaries brought about by a State guarantee” 
and “to avoid moral hazard.” This guidance did not specify exactly what safeguards a program should 
include but required “an adequate combination” of elements including restrictions on advertis ing 
based on the guarantee, balance sheet growth, share buybacks, and executive compensation some of 
which Sweden adopted. 
As specified in the original terms of the Scheme, institutions were prohibited from expanding their 
operations beyond the pace which would have been possible prior to receiving government support. 
This was calculated by Swedish authorities as being the highest of: 
a) The annual growth rate of Swedish nominal GDP in the previous year;  
b) The average historical balance sheet growth in the Swed ish banking sector from 1987 to 
2007; 
c) The average balance sheet growth in the EU banking sector in the prior six months (European 
Commission 2008).  
Additionally, participation in the Scheme could not be used in the marketing of the firm.  
The restriction on balance sheet growth was retracted in an amendment dated January 29, 2009, as 
institutions were reluctant to participate in the Scheme given the restrictions (European Commission 
2009). 
13.  Limits on executive and Board compensation were conditions for par ticipation in the 
Guarantee Scheme. 
The Swedish Guarantee Scheme required participating firms to restrict both salary and bonus pay to 
the five highest-paid executives of the firm. The fixed salary pay of these individuals could not exceed 
the level determined prior to the announcement of the Scheme on October 20th, 2008. Variable bonus 
pay was entirely prohibited for the top five officers at participating firms. In addition, severance 
packages could not exceed the amounts prescribed for senior officers of government organizations, 
and board members at participating institutions could not be compensated above the levels decided 
prior to the announcement of the Scheme (European Commission 2008). 
14.  Although the issuance window of the Guarantee Scheme was initially set for six months, it 
was extended multiple times and ultimately lasted until June 30, 2011.  
At first the Scheme’s issuance window was designed to be short -lived, lasting only until April 30, 
2009, with the option of an extension through December 31, 2009. Through a series of amendments 
and extensions announced by the SNDO and approved by the European Commission in accordance 
with the EU State aid rules, the duration of the Scheme was extended multiple times to run through 
June 30, 2011. Although by 2010 and 2011 Sweden noted improvements in its institutions’ ability to 
921
Swedish Guarantee Scheme Engbith and Kiernan

--- Page 14 ---
secure funding without the benefit of the guarantee, the emerging sovereign debt crisis in Europe 
resulted in continued uncertainties.  Swedish authorities viewed the extens ion of the Guarantee 
Scheme as a “stand -by insurance policy that could give banks access to medium -term financing, if 
conditions were to deteriorate” (European Commission 2010). 
III. Evaluation 
It is difficult to isolate the effects of the Guarantee Scheme from those of other interventions 
implemented by the Swedish authorities around the end of 2008, in particular the Riksbank’s 
extraordinary liquidity support measures. Still, while the Swedish Guarantee Scheme was not as 
widely used as permitted, SN DO officials viewed it as having successfully fulfilled its purpose of 
ensuring the extension of credit to Swedish households and businesses (“ Swedish guarantee 
programme for banks concluded ”). More generally, analysts have credited the Swedish authorities  
preemptive and proactively aggressive use of monetary policy for quickly alleviating the effects of 
the financial crisis (Irwin 2011).  
The Guarantee Scheme was of immense importance to Swedbank AB, which was one of the four 
largest banks in the country a nd at one point issued 90 percent of outstanding guaranteed debt 
securities.  
IV. References 
European Commission. (2008). Re: State aid N 533/2008 – Support measures for the banking 
industry in Sweden . Brussels: State Aid Registry . 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/228076_882359_14_2.pdf 
European Commission. (2010). State aid N 127/2010 – Sweden Extension of the bank guarantee 
scheme. Brussels: State Aid Registry. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/235796_1101932_25_2.pdf 
Grunnesjö, Ulf and Wallenborg, Johan. “SEB Investor Presentation.” Debt Investor Presentation, New 
York, NY, May 12, 2009. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/debt_investor_presentation_may_20
09_ny.pdf 
Irwin, Neil. “Five economic lessons from Sweden, the rock star of the recovery.” The Washington Post. 
June 24, 2011. https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Five economic lessons 
from Sweden, the rock star of the recovery - The Washington Post.pdf 
European Central Bank. (2008). “Recommendations of the Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank on government guarantees for bank debt.” 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/recommendations_on_guarantees 
ecb.pdf 
Riksgälden – Swedish National Debt Office. General Information concerning the Swedish Guarantee 
Scheme. December 2010. 
922
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Riksgalden_General_info_Swedish_G
uarantee_Scheme_2010.pdf 
Riksgälden – Swedish National Debt Office. Swedish guarantee programme for banks concluded. May 
13, 2015. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Riksgalden_Swedish_guarantee_ban
ks_concluded_2015.pdf 
Riksgälden – Swedish National Debt Office. The Debt Office. Last updated July 4, 2019 . 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/About our business - 
Riksgälden.se_.pdf 
V. Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
General Information concerning the Swedish Guarantee Scheme. (Riksgälden – Swedish National 
Debt Office 2010) – Government document summarizing the design of the guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Riksgalden_General_info_Swedish_G
uarantee_Scheme_2010.pdf 
Re: State aid N 533/2008 – Support measures for the banking industry in Sweden. (European 
Commission 2008) – State Aid document outlining the original terms and conditions of the guarantee 
scheme. https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/228076_882359_14_2.pdf 
“SEB Investor Presentation.” (Grunnesjö and Wallenborg 2009) – Private sector report summarizing 
the design and intended impacts of the guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/debt_investor_presentation_may_20
09_ny.pdf 
State aid N 127/2010 – Sweden Extension of the bank guarantee scheme. (European Commission 
2010) – State Aid document outlining the terms and conditions of the program’s extension. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/235796_1101932_25_2.pdf  
 Implementation Documents 
Recommendations of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank on government 
guarantees for bank debt (European Commission 2008) – Official ECB document containing 
guidance for EU countries designing credit guarantee schemes. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/recommendations_on_guarantees 
Re: State aid N 533/2008 – Support measures for the banking industry in Sweden. (European 
Commission 2008) – State Aid document detailing the various support programs implemented by the 
Swedish government in response to the GFC. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/228076_882359_14_2.pdf 
 
923
Swedish Guarantee Scheme Engbith and Kiernan

--- Page 16 ---
State aid N 127/2010 – Sweden Extension of the bank guarantee scheme. (European Commission 
2010) – State Aid document detailing the terms and conditions of the extension of the guarantee 
scheme. https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/235796_1101932_25_2.pdf 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK of 29 October 2008 at the request of the Swedish 
Ministry of Finance on a draft ordinance on State guarantees for banks etc. (CON/2008/62) 
(European Central Bank 2008) – Official ECB document detailing the Swedish government’s request 
to implement the guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/ECB_draft_ordinance_29_Oct_2008.p
df  
OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK of 7 October 2009 on extending government 
guarantees to banks and other institutions (CON/2009/79) (European Central Bank 2009) – Official 
ECB document detailing the first extension and expansion of the guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/ECB_extending_govt_guarantees_7_
Oct_2009.pdf  
OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK of 6 April 2010 on extending government guarantees 
to banks and other institutions (CON/2010/29) (European Central Bank 2010) – Official ECB 
document detailing the second extension and expansion of the guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/ECB_extending_govt_guarantees_6_A
pril_2010.pdf.  
OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK of 20 December 2010 on extending government 
guarantees to banks and other institutions and the prolongation of the State recapitalisation 
scheme (CON/2010/93) (European Central Bank 2010) – Official ECB document detailing the third 
extension and expansion of the guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/CELEX_52010AB0093_EN_TXT.pdf.  
Press Releases/Announcements 
Swedish guarantee programme for banks concluded. (05/13/2015) – Press release published by the 
Swedish National Debt Office announcing the official end of the guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Riksgalden_Swedish_guarantee_ban
ks_concluded_2015.pdf  
Media Stories 
“EU Commission extends Swedish bank guarantee scheme” (Reuters – 12/1/2010) – Media story 
announcing the extension of the Swedish guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Reuters_EU_Commission_extends_S
wedish_bank_guarantee_2010.pdf 
“Five economic lessons from Sweden, the rock star of the recovery” (The Washington Post - 
06/24/2011) – Media story describing the effects of Sweden’s various government interventions, 
924
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
including the guarantee scheme. https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Five 
economic lessons from Sweden, the rock star of the recovery - The Washington Post.pdf  
“Swedbank pulls out of aid programme.” Financial Times – 04/09/2010) – Media story describing 
Swedbank’s recovery following participation in the guarantee scheme. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/FT_Swedbank_pulls_out_aid_progra
mme_2010.pdf.  
Key Academic Papers 
Maintaining Financial Stability in an Open Economy. Sweden in the Global Crisis and Beyond 
(Bryant et al. 2015) – Academic paper assessing the impacts of the GFC and related government 
interventions on Sweden’s economy. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Maintaining_Financial_Stability_in_a
n_Open_Economy.pdf 
The Design of Government Guarantees for Bank Bonds: Lessons from the Recent Financial Crisis 
(Levy and Schich 2010) – Report comparing the various bank debt guarantee schemes implemented 
by governments around the world in response to the GFC. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Levy_and_Schich_2010_0.pdf 
 
Copyright 2015, 2016, 2020 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material 
or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program for 
Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
 
925
Swedish Guarantee Scheme Engbith and Kiernan