--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 2 Issue 1 
2020 
Lessons Learned: Tony Fratto Lessons Learned: Tony Fratto 
Mercedes Cardona 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Organizational Behavior and Theory Commons, Policy History, 
Theory, and Methods Commons, Political Science Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the 
Public Affairs Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2020) "Lessons Learned: Tony Fratto," Journal of Financial 
Crises: Vol. 2 : Iss. 1, 153-155. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1061 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss1/13 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol2/iss1/13

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
T ony Fratto 
By Mercedes Cardona and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Fratto, who was Deputy Assistant and Deputy Press Secretary to the President during the 
financial crisis of 2007-09, gives us his take on the government’s communications efforts and 
how best to prepare for future crises.1 
During a crisis, it is important to have a plan. 
Fratto acknowledged that dealing with the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) was l ike designing 
and building a plane in mid -air; everything was new, and the administration was building 
the tools to deal with the crisis while it was in full gear. Crises are unexpected, but  
organizations can still plan ahead for some instances, he said.  
Practice for a kind of crisis, said Fratto. You don't need to know what the crisis will be, but 
practice what will need to happen when it strikes —lines of communication, divisions of 
labor, roles and information-gathering. Do tabletop exercises to clarify the needs and issues.  
“Find out where the holes are,” he suggests. “Preparation is one thing. You can prepare for a 
crisis without knowing what the crisis is.” 
Future administrations should consider seeking out the officials who were in charge of 
dealing with the GFC for advice in future crises, said Fratto. “Reach out to us for advice,” he 
said. “We have a lot of knowledge and experience and would welcome the opportunity to 
come in and talk through thinking about process and the kinds of processes you hav e in 
place.” 
It is extremely important to establish and maintain relationships. 
Fratto’s immediate predecessor on the job, Michele Davis, was the spokesperson at Treasury 
during the GFC. He had worked with the team at the Fed, led by Michelle Smith, on several 
international crises such as the Argentina debt default earlier in the Bush  administration. 
These relationships and those with reporters were valuable. 
Briefing stakeholders on a regular basis has many benefits. 
Fratto cites the example of the Defense Department, which hold s regularly scheduled daily 
briefings in peacetime to pass on any information available. The press corps becomes used 
to that cadence and the staff gets to know the reporters. That can be useful during a financial 
crisis, when breaking news can move markets and the reaction can make the crisis worse. 
 
1 Lessons Learned are distilled from interviews with the principal conducted by YPFS.  
153

--- Page 4 ---
“Some days you’re not going to have any new questions. You ’re not going to have anything 
new to say, but you should probably still be out every day making sure that communications 
are buttoned down, that misconceptions are being dealt with in a regular way,” said Fratto. 
Educating the press corps has many benefits. 
You can’t develop a crisis communications plan for the entire country, but you can ensure 
that the reporters covering your agency are well-informed. Most government agencies have 
assigned beat reporters who cover them regularly among the largest media outlets, but when 
a crisis strikes, publications that don’t normally cover that beat will assign a new person, and 
the regular beat reporters may be supplemented with additional reporters who don’t know 
the beat as well.  
 “They were covering something over here and then the next thing you know they have to go 
write pieces and interview hedge fund managers on CDOs and credit default swaps and 
things like that,” said Fratto. “The night before, they’re looking at Wikipedia pages trying to 
study what credit default swaps are.”  
Those reporters will need to be brought up the education curve fast, Fratto insists, to avoid 
the government losing control of the narrative of the crisis. Even with the usual adversarial 
relationship between journalists and government, thos e relationships are vital to avoid 
mistakes. Inaccurate stories are far more damaging in the grip of a crisis than accurate but 
unflattering ones. 
“The news cycle never stops. Where are you getting this extra time to go clean up stories? 
You don’t have that time,” said Fratto. “You have to invest on the front end and steady, regular 
education. Not because it ’s going to make the stories flattering. Because it ’s going to make 
the stories accurate.” 
Don’t ignore the politics.  
The GFC exploded at the peak of a presidential campaign year. The White House saw a 
responsibility to bring in both major -party candidates, Sen. John McCain and President 
Barack Obama, into meetings, recognizing one of them would have to deal with the crisis 
once the Bush administration left the White House the following January.  
 
The White House had a responsibility to help the next president be prepared for the 
challenge of the GFC, and the candidates, though they wanted to be briefed, didn’t want to be 
in the position of endorsing or rejecting the administration’s proposals while still running 
for office.  
 
Meanwhile, the administration sent the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act to Capitol Hill 
knowing it would be unpopular back in the congressional districts where many legislators 
were running for reelection. “ A third of the Senate and all of the House are up for election ; 
we’re going to go ask them to make probably the most unpopular vote in the history of the 
154
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 2 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
republic in real time. Political challenges such as these have to be acknowledged and treated 
with care,” said Fratto.  
Build a Reserve Corps 
You will need more people t han you have. When a crisis hits, it’s a big story, media start 
pulling people from a lot of other beats and assigning them to the crisis ; they might have 
been covering the SEC or some other financial topic, but in a crisis, they will be brought in to 
write pieces on topics that they are unfamiliar with. You will need more people to work with 
them to educate the m up front so that what they write is as accurate as possible, because 
inaccurate information in a crisis is deadly.  And you won’t have a lot of time or people to 
correct inaccurate information because you will be dealing with the crisis. So, plan out who 
these people will be and give them some periodic training, so you have this corps in reserve 
when the crisis hits, because you will need them. 
“It would be interesting if you had a situation where you asked three other agencies to each 
identify one person who could be detailed to the department of Treasury by mutual consent 
in the case of a crisis,” said Fratto. “You train that person and teach them about trade. You 
tell them, ‘Keep your eye on what’s going on at Treasury.’ You come up with a reserve troop 
that can be called on for a crisis.”  
 
________________________________________ 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-11 
 
 
155
Lessons Learned: Tony Fratto Cardona and Wiggins