--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 3 
2021 
Lessons Learned: William “Bill” Dudley Lessons Learned: William “Bill” Dudley 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Policy 
Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2021) "Lessons Learned: William “Bill” Dudley," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 3, 
961-965. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1229 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss3/38 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss3/38

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
William “Bill” Dudley 
By Sandra Ward 
William “Bill” Dudley was the executive vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York’s Markets Group from 2007 –09 and vice chairman of the Federal Open Market 
Committee from 2009 to 2018. In January 2010, Dudley was named the 10 th president of the 
New York Fed, succeeding Timothy Geithner. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an 
interview with Mr. Dudley. 
During the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–09 (GFC), it was critical for the Fed to craft 
a lending facility that could provide banks with necessary funding without 
stigmatizing them and, at the same time, allow the Fed to provide liquidity without 
undermining its ability to manage the federal funds rate.  
In late 2007 , the wholesale cred it markets had begun to tighten , and rates for interbank 
lending rose due to spillovers from the housing crisis. Despite this, few banks accessed the 
Federal Reserve’s discount window, its standing facility for overnight lending to depository 
institutions. Dudley discussed some reasons for this and how the Fed addressed this 
problem.  
Dudley stressed the importance of removing the stigma associated with the Fed’s discount 
window as a way of making banks comfortable approaching the Fed for funding. The Term 
Auction Facility (TAF), implemented in December 2007, which Dudley was deeply involved 
with designing and implementing, proved to be the mechanism that encouraged banks to 
come to the Fed without fear of stigma. The auction format encouraged participation 
among many banks, and the lag between the auction date and the receipt of funds removed 
the sense of urgency often associated with such loans. Under TAF, loans were extended first 
for 28 days and later for 84 days. 
Still, the Federal Reserve was limited by  its operating framework from providing large 
amounts of liquidity to the banking system because of its mandate to manage the federal 
funds rate at a certain target.  
Dudley observed:  
Adding reserves through liquidity facilities potentially could undermine the ability 
to keep the funds rate at the target. The facilities, when they were rolled out, weren’t 
open ended and unlimited. They were always for a finite amount of dollars at the 
auction. That was always a little bit of a problem because it me ant the Fed could 
always be one step behind the curve. You also couldn’t reassure people that if you 
needed the liquidity it’s absolutely going to be there.  
961

--- Page 4 ---
The eventual passage of the TARP (Troubled Assets Relief Program) legislation in the fall of 
2008 allowed the Federal Reserve to begin a scheduled plan to pay interest on reserves 
immediately and move to unlimited and open-ended liquidity facilities.  
Noted Dudley:  
The new regime of paying interest on reserves is much better, as it doesn’t create an 
inherent conflict between providing liquidity to the system and maintaining control 
of monetary policy. You can now add as many reserves to the system as you want 
without that having consequences for the Fed’ s ability to target the federal funds 
rate.  
Macroeconomic views need to be bolstered by an understanding of the markets. 
An inherent blind spot in the workings of the Fed, according to Dudley, was its reliance on 
macroeconomic forecast models, in which the financial sector wasn’t much of a factor.  
Dudley pointed out:  
The idea that bad things could happen in the financial sector and could spill over 
powerfully to the real economy wasn’t how macroeconomists thought about things. 
There were many times I talked about how the economy could go sou th: How the 
housing market could turn down, and that could put pressure on the financial asset 
prices, and that could put pressure on financial institutions and the whole system 
could start to unwind.  
 There was considerable skepticism about how this could turn out very badly.  
Nonbank financial institutions were a weak spot during the GFC and remain so today. 
In 2007–09, the Federal Reserve didn ’t have supervisory authority over nonbank financial 
institutions; that remains true today, with very limited exceptions. And it was commonly 
acknowledged, as Dudley pointed out , that “the entity that did have the authority, the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, didn’t put much emphasis on financial stability an d 
safety and soundness. ” This led to a vacuum of information and other developments that 
exacerbated the GFC. Dudley explained: 
There also wasn’t a sense that the failure of a large securities firm [such as Lehman  
Brothers] would be devastating. There are a couple of reasons for that: one, there 
hadn’t been financial securities firms of this size before. They were a product of the 
growth of the capital markets and the securitization markets in the 1980s and 
1990s.  
Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley were 10 t o 20 times bigger than they were in 
the 1970s, maybe more than that. The one sizable securities firm that failed, and it 
was much, much smaller than the firms that failed in 2008, was Drexel Burnham 
Lambert [in 1990] , and there was little contagion to othe r firms from that. The 
962
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
world had changed [by 2007], but  the regulatory regime had not kept up with that 
change. These entities were much bigger, much more interconnected , and much 
more systemic than previous firms had been back in the ’70s and early ’80s.  
Since the financial crisis, the five big independent investment firms either failed (Lehman 
Brothers), were acquired by banks (Bear Stearns an d Merrill Lynch), or gained bank -
holding status (Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs). As a result, a big part of the regulatory 
issue resolved itself in the post -crisis period. However, according to Dudley, the nonbank 
sector continues to pose risks to the system , and that was evident in the most recent 
economic crisis prompted by the COVID–19 pandemic. He observed: 
We saw the weakness in terms of the Fed’s need to intervene in the Treasury market 
and buy massive amounts of Treasuries to help hedge funds unwind very leveraged 
trades, where they were long cash Treasuries and short Treasury futures. We saw it 
again when the Fed had to intervene to support the money market mutual fund 
industry. We saw it again in the Fed intervening to support the corporate bond 
market. Most of the financial difficulties we’ve seen during the current coronavirus 
pandemic are not in th e banking sector. The regulatory oversight of the nonbank 
financial sector still looks quite weak. 
The GFC could have been better contained and less severe if more creative actions 
had been taken sooner. 
It is accepted knowledge that abuses in mortgage und erwriting and the shoddy 
underwriting of securitized assets led to a disastrous chain of events. Dudley explained that 
adding fuel to the fire was that “banks were clearly  undercapitalized relative to the risks 
they were running. Banks didn’t have enough liquidity because their off -balance-sheet 
activities, the special investment vehicles (SIVs), came back on their balance sheets.” 
Another weakness that Dudley pointed to was  the interconnectedness of the financial 
system in 2007.  
He offered that if the Fed had taken system -wide steps earlier, the crisis might have been 
less severe. He suggests that if the Fed had addressed the subprime mortgage market and 
required banks to r aise more capital and to stop paying dividends sooner , they wouldn’t 
have faced as serious a liquidity crunch as they did. Dudley admits that such actions “would 
have taken a lot of foresight and confidence” but thinks such steps could have led to the 
crisis being “better contained.”  
Understanding the linkages within the system and questioning broadly held 
assumptions are vital to avoiding problems in the future. 
Dudley discussed how a key element of the GFC was the interconnectedness of the global 
financial system and how shocks in one area reverberated into other areas. It was a 
development that had largely gone unrecognized and consequently was not well 
understood at the time. Dudley believes that questioning widely held assumptions and 
examining the basis for those assumptions can uncover flaws that potentially could put the 
entire system at risk. It takes imagination and creativity , but Dudley believes it’s a 
963
Lessons Learned: William “Bill” Dudley Ward

--- Page 6 ---
necessary exercise to avert potential disaster. As an example , he recalled the widely held 
opinions regarding securities ratings: 
One assumption that was held broadly was that the ratings of these securitized 
assets reflected their underlying riskiness. We found out that wasn’t true. The 
assumption that the subprime market wasn’t big enough to threa ten financial 
stability turned out to be wrong. When people have strongly held assumptions , and 
those assumptions are generating a boom , and those assumptions subsequently 
turn out to be incorrect, you almost always are going to have a bust on the back end.  
Thinking about how the whole system fits together is absolutely critical, as is 
understanding what assumptions might turn out to be wrong and, if they are wrong, 
what’s likely to happen as a result. 
Solutions should be carefully crafted to be useful and  to instill confidence and 
credibility. 
While most of the programs rolled out by government agencies were well designed and 
provided immediate relief, some were never utilized, raising the question of their 
usefulness. Dudley cautioned that government agen cies need to be careful to design 
appropriate programs well  suited to solving well -diagnosed problems to maintain 
confidence and credibility, especially when time is short and staff is stretched. He 
highlighted one example from the GFC that illustrated this point: 
There was a money -market fund intervention called the MMIFF (Money Market 
Investor Funding Facility). I didn’t think it was a very useful facility at the time, and I 
argued against implementing it, but I was overruled, and it was implemented, and it 
was never used. 
It didn’t cause any grave harm. But it did use up scarce staff resources and time. 
Also, I didn’t want to do things that I didn’t think were going to work because there 
was a credibility consequence to that. At present, in the current crisis, one of the 
facilities that has been introduced and where the jury is still out is the Main Street 
Lending Facility.  
However, Dudley also emphasized that usage of the facility may not be the only measure of 
success: “In assessing the  value of the Fed's liquidity facility, it's important not to assess it 
on how much it’s used but assess it on how much it reassures people and changes the 
perception of risk.” He described how the fact that the facility is cloaked in credibility from 
the very beginning itself has benefit:  
The announcement of the intervention is going to precede the actual 
implementation by several weeks or even months , and so credibility is important to 
reassure people the fire engines are on their way and they will put o ut the fire. Even 
though they haven ’t arrived yet, people will feel more comfortable that the whole 
city block isn’t going to burn down. 
964
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
It’s important to be cautious about making sure you got the diagnosis right and 
actually coming up with responses that are credible because the next time when you 
introduce a liquidity facility in a crisis, you want people to respond very positively 
to the announcement of the facility even before it ’s actually in place.  I think the Fed 
has a good record in this regard, and that has made their inventions more effective.  
_____________________________________ 
Dated: November 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-36 
 
965
Lessons Learned: William “Bill” Dudley Ward