--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 3 
2021 
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) 
Capital Injections Capital Injections 
Priya Sankar 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Policy 
Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Sankar, Priya (2021) "Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 3, 598-649. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1202 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss3/28 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss3/28

--- Page 3 ---
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria 
(FROB) Capital Injections1 
Priya Sankar2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
March 9, 2020; Revised: November 12, 2021 
Abstract 
The Spanish government created the Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria 
(FROB), known in English as the Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring (FROB) in 2009 to 
perform temporary capital injections that facilitated the restructuring and mergers and 
acquisitions of struggling institutions. The FR OB used preferred shares, ordinary shares, 
and contingent convertible bonds to recapitalize struggling Spanish credit institutions. The 
FROB injected a total of €54.4 billion of capital in three rounds. FROB I in 2010 injected 
capital to support the merger s of 25 insolvent regional savings banks, or cajas, into seven 
larger, more solvent banks through the subscription of convertible preferred shares. FROB 
II in 2011–12 recapitalized struggling banks, including three of those seven merged banks, 
using ordinary shares. FROB III in 2012 –13 recapitalized banks that had failed a stress test 
by subscribing shares and purchasing contingent convertible bonds. In 2012, the 
government gave FROB resolution powers and created an asset management company, 
Sareb, of which  FROB owns 45%. As of December 2018, the FROB still was holding shares 
of a number of institutions. The FROB’s timely capital injections helped capitalize Spanish 
banks and prevent a systemically damaging insolvency, but it had incurred losses as of the 
end of 2018. 
Keywords: capital injections, FROB, Global Financial Crisis, Sareb, Spain, recapitalizations, 
resolution 
  
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering the responses to the global financial crisis that pertain to broad -based capital injection 
programs. Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
598

--- Page 4 ---
At a Glance 
Spanish banks experienced substantial losses on real estate loans during t he global 
financial crisis in 2009. Concerns about 
regional savings bank s, or cajas, and their 
exposure to real estate were realized in 
the failure of Caja Castilla -La Mancha. This 
spurred the Spanish government to create 
the Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada 
Bancaria (FROB), known in  English as the 
Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring. 
In 2010, the FROB subscribed preferred 
shares in many cajas, facilitating their 
mergers and sales, which resulted in 
larger, more stable, and more solvent 
institutions. This set of injections is known 
as FROB I.  The passage of Royal Decree -
law 2/2011  allowed the FROB to 
recapitalize insolvent institutions through 
the purchase of ordinary shares. The 
FROB could also require them to submit 
plans to maintain compliance with capital 
requirements. Injections made in 2011 –12 
adhered to this law  and Spain’s new 
capital requirements , and cons tituted 
FROB II. In 2012, the Spanish government 
gave the FROB powers to restructure 
banks via the purchase of contingent 
convertible securities (CoCos) as well as 
preferred and ordinary shares. Spain also 
made FROB a resolution authority and established Sareb, an asset management company  
or “bad bank .” These policies were pursuant to a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
between Spain and the European Commission, which recommended plans for resolution 
and troubled asset purchases in Spain’s financial stability framework. The MoU required an 
independent consultant to perform a stress test on major Spanish banks and group them 
into categories of solvency. The FROB made a series of capital injections  into banks that 
failed this stress test in 2012–13 (FROB III), using shares and CoCos. 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: FROB made capital injections to restructure 
credit institutions that could not independently 
address their weaknesses and reinforce the 
resources of credit institutions participating in 
mergers and acquisitions. It later executed the 
resolution processes of failing credit i nstitutions and 
investment firms. 
Announcement Date June 27, 2009 
Operational Date June 27, 2009 
End of Issuance Window  No explicit window 
Legal Authority Initial: Royal Decree-
law 9/2009 
Current: Law 11/2015 
Peak Utilization  € 54.4 billion (BdE 
2017a, 237) 
Participants Several 
Administrators Bank of Spain; deposit 
guarantee funds; 
Ministry of Economy 
and Finance 
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada 
Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections 
599
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Summary Evaluation 
The FROB ultimately made €54. 4 billion in capital injections , on which it posted losses of 
€42.6 billion as of the end of 2018 (Appendices 8 and 9). It also holds a 45% stake in Sareb. 
The FROB’s capital injections  were generally successful in capitalizing and stabilizing the 
banking sector and preventing a destabilizing insolvency in the banking sector . The FROB 
now has the power to resolve institutio ns, in line with Europe’s Single Resolution 
Mechanism.  
  
600
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 6 ---
Spain Context 2012–2013 
GDP 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted to USD) 
$1.326 trillion in 2012 
$1.355 trillion in 2013 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted to USD) 
$28,324 in 2012 
$29,060 in 2013 
Sovereign credit rating  
(five-year senior debt) 
 
Data for 2012: 
Moody’s: Baa3 
S&P: BBB– 
Fitch: BBB 
 
Data for 2013: 
Moody’s: Baa3 
S&P: BBB– 
Fitch: BBB 
Size of banking system 
 
$2.577 trillion in 2012 
$2.518 trillion in 2013 
Size of banking system as a percentage of GDP 
 
194.34% in 2012 
185.80% in 2013 
Size of banking system as a percentage of financial 
system 
 
Data not available for 
2012 
Data not available for 
2013 
Five-bank concentration of banking system 
 
70% in 2012 
77% in 2013 
Foreign involvement in banking system 2% in 2012 
0% in 2013 
Government ownership of banking system 
Data not available for 
2012 
Data not available for 
2013 
Existence of deposit insurance 
100% insurance on 
deposits up to $133,333 in 
2010 
100% insurance on 
deposits up to $137,830 in 
2013 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; World Bank 
Deposit Insurance Dataset. 
601
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
Prior to the Global Financial Crisis, the Spanish economy was dealing with  rapidly growing 
private sector debt, weak competitiveness , and other imbalances (IMF 2012b). In early 
2009, Spanish banks began to face liquidity shortages and falling real estate values during 
the Global Financial Crisis (Official State Bulletin 2009). The resulting credit tightening was 
especially difficult for small businesses and households, which were already suffering from 
the deterioration of the international crisis in October 2008.  Spanish financial institutions 
had made it through the early stage s of the crisis in late 2007 and early 2008 without 
encountering serious problems (BdE 2017 a). As the crisis worsened  and bank liquidity 
problems became more severe, leading to a shortage of credit, Spain established emergency 
programs, including a temporary state guarantee scheme of up to €100 billion that 
guaranteed bank liabilities and a Financial Asset Acquisition Fund (FAAF)  of up to €50 
billion to purchase high -quality financial assets to s upport medium -term bank  funding 
(Mayer Brown 2009). 
In 2009, the Spanish real estate sector was hit and the domestic economy entered a severe 
recession (IMF 2012b). Regional savings banks , or cajas, did not have enough capital to 
deal with their growing nonperforming loan books  (Mayer Brown 2009). In March 2009, 
Caja Castilla-La Mancha , which had €24 billion  in assets,  failed to meet its capital 
requirements. T he Bank of Spain replaced its directors, and the Deposit Guarantee Fund 
provided €7 billion of liquidity before selling the bank to Banco Liberta (at the end of the 
merger process, Caja Castilla-La Mancha was integrated in Liberbank, the entity resulting 
from the merger of several Cajasur savings banks) and granting an asset protection scheme 
(EC 2010). But the central bank argued  that the government’s existing tools for supporting 
troubled banks were sufficient only for idiosyncratic crises, not the impending s ystemic 
crisis (Ponce Huerta 2019). 
Program Description 
In June 20 09, the Spanish government created the Fondo de Reestructuraci ón Ordenada 
Bancaria (FROB), in English known as the Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring. The FROB 
was created in an effort to maintain Spanish economic confidence by supporting financial 
institutions (Official State Bulletin 2009 ). The FROB had two objectives: to restructure 
credit institutions that could not independently address their weaknesses and to reinforce 
the resources of credit institutions participating in mergers and acquisitions (BdE 2017a). 
The FROB typically followed the same three steps in each c apital injection : (1) searching 
for a private sector solution, (2) using government funds to strengthen the troubled credit 
institution, and (3) restructuring the institution with FROB capital (Official State Bulletin 
2009, 53194). The FROB  acquired preferred convertible shares  to facilitate mergers and 
acquisitions. The FROB encouraged recapitalized credit institution s to repurchase the 
shares as soon as possib le. Most participating institutions were unable to do so, and their 
preferred shares converted into common capital (BdE 2017a). 
602
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 8 ---
FROB I, in 2010 focused on facilitating mergers and acquisition s from mostly savings 
banks. During this period, the FROB acquired €9.7 billion in convertible preferred shares in 
savings bank s, consolidating 25 institutions into seven. These measures accelerated the 
consolidation of the savings bank sector overall from 46 entities in 2007 to 15 entities in 
2011 (BdE 2017a). It merged savings banks to clean up their balance sheets  and reduce the 
oversized sector while achieving efficiency gains by reducing the number of branch offices 
and employees (de Juan 2019). 
In 2011, Spain sought to strengthen the solvency of its financial institutions, in line with the 
Basel III international capital accords . Royal Decree -law 2/2011  established new capital 
requirements that conformed to Basel III and established the second set of FROB injections. 
FROB II  allowed FROB to acquire shares an d exercise shareholder rights . During this 
period, the FROB acquired common shares of entities to help them meet the new capital 
requirements. The FROB subscribed these shares at market value. FROB II required banks 
to have core capital equal to 8% of their risk-weighted assets, or 10% if the entity faced 
funding constraints (defined as excessive reliance on wholesale funding or limited third -
party shareholders) . The Spanish definition of core capital at the time wa s close to the 
Basel III definition of common equity Tier 1 capital, and it was later aligned with European 
regulations (OECD 2012). The Spanish law required banks to meet t his requirement by 
March 2011, one month after the law was published . Banks could extend the deadline to 
September 30 if they submitted a capital plan that the Bank of Spain approved. During that 
time, credit institutions could attempt to reach minimum capital requirements by 
attracting private investors, going public, or seeking a FROB capital injection . For 
institutions that took FROB capital , the Bank of Spain could restrict dividend distribution, 
share issuance, and management bonuses if they had a shortfall of an amount equivalent to 
20% of their required capital ratio . Banks could find buyers for the shares that the FROB 
held, or the banks themselves could repurchase the shares from the FROB within five years 
(Official State Bulleti n 2011 ). Further legal decrees gave the FROB and Bank of Spain  
supervisory oversight of recapitalized banks , unified the three sectoral deposit guarantee 
funds, and established transparency requirements on real estate exposure s (Appendix B; 
BdE 2017a). 
FROB III was launched in 2012 under Law 9/2012  and as a requirement of the 
Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU) signed with the European Commission. Under 
FROB III, the FROB had new resolution powers. It also created an early action program that 
allowed the FROB to monitor institutions that were struggling but not yet insolvent enough 
to require intervention ( Official State Bulletin 2012 ). FROB III allowed the FROB to 
recapitalize institutions not only through  ordinary shares but also through contingent 
convertible securities (CoCos) (FROB III). It also established Sareb, the asset management 
company for banking restructuring. More detailed discussion of Sareb can be found in Tam 
2021. 
Law 11/2015, the Spanish transposition of the  European Commission’s bank recovery and 
resolution directive (BRRD), built upon FROB III and formalized the resolution processes 
while broadening the institutions eligible for assistance . It established competent 
supervisors (Bank of Spain, European Centra l Bank , or National Securities Market 
603
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
Commission) that were able help institutions that fail to meet capital requirements through 
early action (Official State Bulletin 2015). 
Outcomes 
The total amount of FROB aid injected in credit institutions was €54.4 billion in a variety of 
capital instruments (BdE 2017a). In FROB I, the FROB  integrated 25 cajas into seven new 
banks and injected €9.7 billion via convertible preferred shares (Appendix C; IMF 2017). 
For FROB II, in March 2011, the Bank of Spain identified 13 institutions that did not meet 
their capital requirements and required them to present their recapitalization strategies 
(BdE 2017a). Four of those banks were able to raise funds through share sales or injections 
by their parent companies. Th e FROB agreed to provide €15.9 billion to recapitalize nine 
banks, but s everal of these banks were again able to raise private funds. Ultimately, the 
FROB subscribed €5.7 billion of common shares to recapitalize four banking groups —
Novacaixagalicia, Catalunya Caixa, Unnim, and Banco de Valencia.  A fifth, Caja de Ahorros 
del Mediterráneo (CAM), requested FROB II support  but received aid instead from the 
Deposit Guarantee Fund ( Appendix E). The FROB’s equity stakes in the four banks ranged 
from 90% to 100% (FROB 2019). The four banks included three of the seven banking 
groups merged via FROB I (Ponce Huerta 2019). The Deposit Guarantee Fund compensated 
the FROB €953 million for its investment and losses  in Unnim: €380 million for pref erred 
share subscriptions in FROB I, €5 million for capitalization of accrued interest , and €568 
for capital increase in FROB II. 
For FROB III,  the Kingdom of Spain  borrowed3 €41.3 billion under the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM), which was then channeled to FROB through a loan from the Spanish 
Treasury (Strauch; IMF 2017 ). A Memorandum of Understanding between the European 
Commission and Spain made this aid contingent on a stress test of the Spanish banking 
system conducted by independent consult ants ( EC 2012 ). Oliver Wyman conducted 
independent assessments of Spanish banks to determine their capital shortfalls and the 
level of the FROB’s participation (Fontevecchia  2012). The stress test identified 10 
institutions that needed a total of €55.9 bil lion in capital. The FROB ultimately injected 
€38.8 billion to recapitalize eight credit institutions for restructuring or resolution ; two 
banks were able to raise capital privately. The FROB helped make some failing institutions 
more attractive for potent ial buyers through  asset protection schemes and protections 
against contingent liabilities. It also invested €2.1 billion in Sareb (Spain’s “bad bank”) in 
2012, which amounted to 45% of Sareb’s equity and subordinated debt. 
The FROB’s  losses as of 201 8 were €42.6 billion not including the interest and fees 
received or paid, or the expenses incurred . As FROB wrote off early investments in banks 
and experienced losses, the government agreed to convert the loan that it issued to FROB 
(using the loan the ESM gave to Spain) into equity, to make FROB’s equity positive. In 2012, 
 
3 According to a commenter, the amount of this loan was up to €100 billion , of which only €41 billi on was 
used. 
604
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 10 ---
the government converted €27 billion of its original €41.3 billion in state loans to FROB 
into equity (Strauch; IMF 2017 ). In June 2017, the government converted an additional 
€3 billion of state loans to FROB into equity.  The FROB owed the government €10.5 billion 
at the end of 2018 (FROB 2019). 
About €38 billion of the FROB’s losses result ed from four banks: Abanca (formerly NCG), 
Bankia, Catalunya  Caixa, and Banco de Valencia. NCG and Catalunya Caixa participated in 
FROB I, II, and III; Bankia participated in FROB I and III; and Banco de Valencia participated 
in FROB II and III ( IMF 2017 ). The FROB still owns approximately 16.12% of Caixa Bank, 
which has absorbed Bankia. 
As seen in Figure 1, by the end of 2016, FROB still held  about €11 billion in investments 
(IMF 2017), mostly representing its remaining 66% stake in Bankia.  
Figure 1: Legacy Assets and State Contingencies, end-2016 (in billions of euros, 
unless indicated otherwise) 
 
Source: IMF 2017. 
Between 2008 and 2011, the savings bank sector in Spain changed radically; 42 of the 45 
institutions existing at the end of 2007 eventually received capital injections from the Bank 
of Spain in 2010 and 2011 and were merged to 15 entities (BdE  2017a). The FROB gave 
financial support  for seven of these mergers during FROB I . In some of these cases , the 
three sectoral deposit guarantee funds also contributed financial support.  Figures 2 and 3 
show an overview of some of FROB’s injections and interventions in major banks. 
The Kingdom of Spain accepted €38.8 billion in European assi stance for recapitalization in 
2012; the outstanding amount was €23.7 billion, or 57%, as of early 2019 (EC 2019). 
The FROB ha d recovered €5.9 billion of aid it dis bursed as of 2019 , of which €4. 5 billion 
came from bank sales and capital instrument repayme nts and €1.4 billion c ame from 
interest repayments (Ponce Huerta 2019). This does not include €2.8 billion received from 
Bankia in dividends or the proceeds from selling shares of Bankia for €2.1 billion.  
605
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 2: Historical Table of FROB Aid as of 2017 
 
Source: Ponce Huerta 2019. 
  
606
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 3: Summary of Integration and Restructuring Processes in FROB I 
 
Source: Ponce Huerta 2019. 
  
607
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a Package: The capital injections power of the Fund for the Orderly 
Restructuring of the Banking Sector was not initially part of a package, but it was 
updated to include resolution powers, including the transfer of assets to an asset 
management company (Sareb) as well as a resolution fund (National Resolution 
Fund). 
The financial safety net infras tructure that existed in Spain in 2009 included FROB as well 
as three sector-focused deposit guarantee funds and the Bank of Spain ( IMF 2012b; Official 
State Bulletin 2009 ). Though these organizations worked in tandem, they were not a 
package, as the government created the deposit guarantee funds in 1977 under the 
administration of the Bank of Spain ( Official State Bulletin 1977 ). In November 2011, the 
government merged the three deposit guarantee funds  into the Fondo de Garantía de 
Depósitos (FGD) or Deposit Guarantee Fund in English (BdE 2017a). Law 9/2012 expanded 
the FROB’s powers  and established Sareb, Spain’s government -owned asset management 
company ( Official State Bulletin 2012 ). Sareb was responsible for managing  assets 
transferred to it by Spa nish institutions recapitalized by the FROB. Law 9/2012 also 
established the FROB as a resolution authority. 
2. Legal Authority: Initially, Royal Decree-law 9/2009 (Official State Bulletin 2009 ) 
gave FROB the power to carry out temporary capital injections, t hough later laws 
added to its authority. 
The FROB was created in June 2009  by Royal Decree -law 9/2009  to manage the 
restructuring of credit institutions a nd contribute to the strengthening of their resources 
(Official State Bulletin 2009 ). Royal Decree-law 2/2011  allowed FROB  to help entities 
achieve capital targets of 8% or 10% of risk-weighted assets (Official State Bulletin 2011). 
Law 9/2012  established the possibility of the resolution, not just the restructuring , of a 
credit institution that was not viable and established FROB’s role in such processes, as well 
as early action to prevent the failure of a financial institution. 4 FROB could value 
 
4 Definitions of actions from Law 9/2012, Article 2: 
Early action: The procedure applicable to a credit institution when, in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter II, it fails or there are objective elements that are reasonably foreseeable that cannot meet the 
solvency, liquidity, or organizational structure or internal control requirements, but is in a position to return 
to compliance by its own means, without prejudice to the exceptional and limited public financial support 
provided for in article 9.f of this Law. 
Restructuring: The procedure applicable to a credit institution when, in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter III, it requires public financial support to ensure its viability and it is foreseeable that such suppo rt 
will be reimbursed or recovered in accordance with the provisions of Chapter V, or when its resolution could 
not be carried out without seriously damaging effects on the stability of the financial system.  
Resolution: The procedure applicable to a credit  institution when, in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter IV, it is unviable, or foreseeable that it will be in the near future, and for reasons of public interest 
and financial stability it is necessary to avoid bankruptcy. 
608
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 14 ---
institutions and restructure institutions that require d public financial support to maintain 
viability while minimizing the use of public resources (Official State Bulletin 2012 ). 
According to a commenter close to the program, this law also included the possibility to 
impose losses to subordinated creditors in these processes. 
After FROB III, Law 11/2015  established a more formal and comprehensive regime of 
systemic risk policy.  It clarified the FROB’s resolution powers  and transposed the BRRD 
into Spanish regulation, including bail -in power for both subordinat ed and senior debt. 
This allowed a troubled entity to remain in business while separating its unviable parts, the 
latter of which was already possible under Law 9/2012 . It also gave the FROB early action 
and preventative powers to reduce the risk of insolv ency and to facilitate the resolution of 
the entity or specific assets if needed. The 2015 law also provided tools that the FROB used 
to shift the financial burden of resolution to an entity’s shareholders and creditors rather 
than public resources (a “bail in”).  The law allowed the preventative resolution authority 
(the Bank of Spain) to create resolution plans for  less significant entities like those  not 
under European Central Bank supervision, which it required to include a scenario in which 
no public support was available. This law also empowered the FROB to perform capital 
increase or reduction operations, amortize capital instruments , or perform internal 
recapitalization actions (Official State Bulletin 2015). 
3. Communications: The first law creating the FROB was advertised as an effort to 
prevent systemic risk from failing small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in 
an otherwise strong banking sector , but communications about the later law 
showed more urgency in dealing with the financial crisis. 
Royal Decree -law 9/2009  paints the Spanish banking sector in 2009  as resilient and 
relatively strong (Official State Bu lletin 2009 ). However, it states that  smaller struggling 
institutions could, en masse, constitute a systemic risk. 
The Congress of Deputies (lower house of the legislature) in Spain approved Royal Decree-
law 2/2011, allowing the recapitalization of Spanish  entities by a vote of 177 to eight, with 
157 abstentions from the Popular Party and Basque nationalist party  (Europa Press 2011). 
Elena Salgado, the  Spanish deputy prime minister and former minister of economy and 
finance, described the law as being extremely urgent and necessary to give the green light 
to the most recent package of financial reforms articulated in this decree  and to minimize 
the impact of the global financial crisis on the Spanish financial system . She said it would 
help to complete the reorganization of the financial sector, clear doubts in the markets , and 
guarantee a sufficient flow of credit to encourage maximum recovery and job creation. 
4. Governance/Administration: The Ministry of Economy and Finance decided on 
the composition of FROB’s Governing Commission, comp osed of representatives 
from the Bank of Spain and the three deposit guarantee funds. 
An eight -member Governing Commissio n appointed by the Ministry of Economy and 
Finance operated the FROB beginning in 2009 (Official State Bulletin 2009 ). The Bank of 
Spain proposed five of the eight members . The three deposit guarantee funds —for savings 
banks, banks, and credit cooperatives —were represented by one member each. The 
609
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
minister of economy and finance also appointed a member from the General Intervention 
Board of the State Administration, proposed by the general auditor, as an additional 
representative on the Governing Commission with a voice but not a vote. The chair of FROB 
was the deputy governor of the Bank of Spain at the time. 
The Governing Commission was empowered to make its own rules and delegate power as 
it saw fit (Official State Bulletin 200 9). It had the power to approve external financing 
operations, like bond issuance , to finance FROB’s activities. At least half the vot ing 
members of the Governing Commission had to be present to hold a session and adopt 
agreements, which had to be supported by a majority of members. The secretary of state 
for the economy appeared quarterly before the Congress of Deputies Finance and Economy 
Committee to report the activities of FROB and the situation of the Spanish banking sector. 
The Governing Commission subsequently had to  approve this report. The president of the 
Governing Commission also reported to this congressional committee within 30 days after 
each injection by the fund. The Governing Commission was also obligated to keep the 
activities of the fund secret. 
In 2011, the legislature changed the composition of the Governing Commission  to have 
nine members, of which one each represent ed the Ministry of Finance and Budgets and the 
Ministry of Economy (Official State Bulletin 2011 ). Four members were proposed by the 
Bank of Spain, and three members were proposed by the deposit guarantee funds. 
In 2012, the legislature changed the composi tion of the Governing Commission to include 
four members nominated by  the Bank of Spain, of which one was the president of the 
Governing Commission ; the secretary general of the Treasury, who was also the vice 
president; the undersecretary of economy and competitiveness; the president of the 
Accounting and Audit Institute ; the director general of economic policy; and the general 
director of budget. A director general of the FROB was appointed by royal decree of the 
Council of M inisters, and he supervised and managed the FROB ( Official State Bulletin 
2012). According to a commenter close to the program, as the deposit guarantee funds had 
stepped out of FROB’s equity, they no longer had representatives on the Governing 
Commission as of this law. 
In 2015, the legislature again changed the composition of the Governing Commission to 
have 11 members: the president of the FROB (chair); four members nominated by the Bank 
of Spain, one of whom was the deputy governor (vice-chair); three members nominated by 
the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness ; the vice president of the National Securities 
Market Commission  (Comisión Nacional del Mercado de Valores, or CNMV) ; and two 
representatives from the Ministry of Finance and Public Administra tion (Official State 
Bulletin 2015). This law indicated that the chair of FROB was independent form the Bank of 
Spain; he or she was proposed by the government and confirmed by the legislature. 
Figure 4 below shows the summary of member changes for the Governing Commission of 
FROB. 
  
610
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 4: Development of the Governing Committee of the FROB (2009–Present) 
 
Source: Ponce Huerta 2019. 
611
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
5. Funding Sources: The FROB ha d initial funding of €9 billion from the General 
State Bud get and deposit guarantee funds, which it supplemented through 
borrowing. 
Of the FROB’s initial €9 billion,  €3 billion was to be disbursed when its constitution was 
formalized, defined by the time the members of the Governing Commission were all 
appointed (Official State Bulletin 2009). The General State Budget allocated €6.75 billion to 
the initial financing  of the FROB. The deposit guarantee funds contribute d €2.25 billion, 
and FROB had authority to  obtain additional financing by issuing fixed -income securities, 
taking loans, or participating in any other debt operations, provided that those borrowings 
did not exceed three times the permanent financing at any time. After January 1, 2010, with 
the authorization of  the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the FROB could obtain 
additional funding of up to 10 times its permanent financing. 
The law required the FROB to hold uncommitted funds in public debt or other highly liquid, 
low-risk assets (Official State Bulletin 2009 ). Any returns from these assets were added to 
the FROB’s permanent financing, which paid any fees incurred in the management of these 
assets. 
The law empowered the General State Administration to guarantee the FROB ’s debt , 
subject to the approval of the Ministry of Economy and Finance (Official State Bulletin 
2009). Until December 31, 2009, the guarant ee was limited to €27 billion; the legislature 
set the limit in subsequent years in the annual budget. If the FROB defaulted on an 
obligation, the state paid compensation to the owners of guaranteed securities  within five 
days of the expiration of the obligation. The Min istry of Economy and Finance establish ed 
the terms of guaranteed compensations, and the General Directorate of the Treasury and 
Financial Poli cy would make payments if the guarantee were exercised, though it never 
was. 
In 2012, the Spanish government requested financial assistance from the European Union  
(EU) and International Monetary Fund ( IMF). This aid was approved subject to stress tests 
conducted by external consultants  in order to identify the capit al needs of various 
institutions (EC 2012). The stress tests carried out by consultant Oliver Wyman  concluded 
that 10 banks required € 55.9 billion of additional capital  (BdE 2017a). T wo banks found 
private solutions . T he European Stability Mechanism ultimately provided €39 billion to 
recapitalize the other eight banks ; the FROB covered the remaining needs by enforcing 
losses on shareholders and subordinated debt holders and facilitating a sset transfers to 
Sareb (IMF 2017). 
In 2017, the Ministry of Economy capitalized €3 billion  more of its loans  to the FROB to 
strengthen its balance sheet. This capitalization was done to return FROB’s equity to 
positive numbers, but no new money was involv ed, just an effect of accounting . To keep 
FROB afloat, the Treasury converted some of its debt holdings in FROB to equity, allowing 
FROB to maintain positive equity and potentially attract creditors , though FROB has not 
funded itself through debt issuance since 2011 (Segovia 2017). 
612
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 18 ---
6. Eligible Institutions: Institutions eligible for FROB were savings banks (FROB I), 
commercial banks (FROB II), and various credit institutions (FROB III). 
The government created FROB I primarily to recapitalize and merge savings banks and 
FROB II primarily to recapitalize commercial banks . Most of the savings banks that 
received FROB I injections were transformed into banks due to changes in regulation. All 
recipients of FROB II funds were previously savings banks prior to FROB I. 
After the stress test s, Law 11/2015 permitted the FROB to be a resolution authority  for a 
broader set of companies, including investment services companies and financial entities 
(other than insurance and reinsurance entities) established in Spain that were subsidiaries 
of credit institutions or investment services companies (Official State Bulletin 2015). It also 
included financial holding companies based in Spain or other European Union member 
states, provided they were supervised by a competent superv isor.5 Spanish branches of 
European Union entities were also eligible. Investment services companies whose legally 
required minimum share capital was less than €730,000 or that conducted specific 
activities enumerated in the law were not eligible. 
7. Restructuring Procedures: In all three phases, restructuring authorities 
including the FROB could overtake the management of a failing credit institution 
and facilitate a merger or acquisition with a solvent entity. 
FROB I and II 
The Bank of Spain expected strugg ling credit institutions to inform the central bank within 
one month and provide an action plan for strengthening their equity (Official State Bulletin 
2009). The plan could involve a merger or acquisition with a solvent entity, which had to be 
actualized within three months. The Bank of Spain evaluated the organization and 
management of the credit institution to determine whether it was viable as a stand -alone 
entity going forward. 
If the Bank of Spain determined that a credit institution that had not subm itted a plan had 
financial weaknesses, it required such an institution to submit a plan within one month. 
The Bank of Spain needed to approve these plans and could  modify or add necessary 
measures to ensure that the plan wa s sufficient to overcome any financial weaknesses. If a 
month passed  after the submission of a plan without explicit approval, the plan was 
approved automatically. 
The FROB intervened to restructure any credit institution that did not present a required 
plan, presented an infeasible p lan, rejected  Bank of Spain additions to a prop osed plan, 
declared to the Bank of Spain that there was no viable solution, deviated greatly from the 
 
5 A competent supervisor was the Bank of Spain, European Central Bank, within the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism, responsible for the supervision of credit institutions, and the National Securities Market 
Commission as the authority responsible for the supervision of investment serv ices companies (Official State 
Bulletin 2015). 
613
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 19 ---
plan, or had a plan that it s Deposit Guarantee Fund objected to . In these cases, the Bank of 
Spain replace d the management of the credit institution  and appointed the FROB as the 
administrator of the institution. The FROB had one month to create a detailed report on the 
institution’s viability and to submit a restructuring plan to the Bank of Spain. The FROB 
also submitted an economic impact report of the restructuring to the Ministry of Economy 
and Finance. The ministry could oppose the restructuring within 10 days of submission. As 
long as a restructuring plan wa s prepared, the FROB could provide financial support to the 
credit institution on a temporary basis by way of measures such as favorable loans or asset 
acquisition, or facilitations of mergers and acquisitions . Investments made by the FROB 
were not subject to legal limitations applied to the d eposit guarantee fund in credit 
institutions (Official State Bulletin 2009 ). In addition, the boards of entities requesting aid 
under FROB II had between five and 15 members, of which at least one -third we re 
independent directors (Official State Bulletin 2011). 
For FROB II, in March 2011, the Bank of Spain identified 13 institutions that did not meet 
their capital requirements and required them to present their recapitalization strategies 
(BdE 2017a). Four of those banks were able to raise funds through share sal es or injections 
by their parent companies. The FROB agreed to provide €15.9 billion to recapitalize nine 
banks (Appendix E), but several of these banks were again able to raise private funds. 
Ultimately, the FROB purchased €5.7 billion of common shares to  recapitalize four banking 
groups—Novacaixagalicia, Catalunya Caixa, Unnim, and Banco de Valencia.  A fifth, Caja de 
Ahorros del Mediterráneo , requested FROB II support  but received aid instead from the 
Deposit Guarantee Fund ( Appendix F). The FROB’s equity  stakes in the four banks ranged 
from 90% to 100% (FROB 2019). The four banks included three of the seven banking 
groups merged via FROB I (Ponce Huerta 2019). The Deposit Guarantee Fund compensated 
the FROB €953 million for its investment and losses in Unnim: €380 million for preferred 
share subscriptions in FROB I, €5 million for capitalization of accrued interest , and €568 
for capital increase in FROB II. 
FROB III 
The law provided three possible actions for credit institutions: early intervention, 
restructuring, and resolution. 
Institutions that did not, but could potentially , maintain viability and meet capital 
requirements through their own means were eligible for early action ( Official State Bulletin 
2012). This entailed submitting an action plan to th e Bank of Spain, which, with FROB’s 
input, modif ied and approve d it, as appropriate. This process helped capitalize entities 
without public support, to prevent them from becoming insolvent. 
Institutions that required public support to maintain their viability, and whose resolution 
would likely cause detrimental effects to Spanish financial stability , were co nsidered for 
restructuring. These institutions had to  inform the FROB and the Bank of Spain of their 
status and, within 15 days, submit a plan of restructuring, with a planned execution date of 
no more than three months after its approval by the  FROB ( Official State Bulletin 2012 ). 
The FROB could modify the plan before it was sent to the Bank of Spain for approval, which 
had to approve it within one month of receiving it. 
614
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 20 ---
The Memorandum of Understanding between Spain and the E uropean Commission signed 
in 2012 established a framework that categorized banks into different levels of eligibility 
for aid (EC 2012). Based on the results of a stress test conducted by an external consultant 
and the restructuring plans of banks, banks were grouped into four categories. 
Group 0 will constitute those banks for which no capital shortfall is identified and no 
further action is required. Group 1 has been pre -defined as banks already owned by 
the Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring (FROB) (BFA/Bankia, Catalunya Caixa, NCG 
Banco and Banco de Valencia). Group 2 will constitute banks with capital shortfalls 
identified by the Stress Test and unable to meet those capital shortfalls privately 
without having recourse to State aid. Finally, Group 3 will constitute banks with capital  
shortfall identified by the stress test with credible recapitalisation plans and able to 
meet those capital shortfalls privately without recourse to State aid (EC 2012).6 
The Bank of Spain and the European Central Bank closely monitor ed the liquidity situation 
of banks that had capital shortfalls in the stress test ( EC 2012). The Bank of Spain regularly 
reported this  information to the European Commission, European Central Bank, and 
International Monetary Fund. 
The stress test assessed 1 4 banking groups , which represented 90% of the assets of the 
Spanish banking system over a three-year period (BdE 2017a). 
The stress test identified 10 banks that needed €55.9 billion of additional capital  (BdE 
2017a). Two banks found private solutions. The FROB invested €39 billion to recapitalize 
the other eight banks, using funds provided by the European Stability Mechanis m. The 
banks raised their capital ratios through loss absorption by investors holding subordinated 
debt and other hybrid instruments, asset transfers to Sareb, burden sharing, and asset sales 
(IMF 2012a). 
The stress test concluded that 90% of capital needs were in the four entities in Group 1, in 
which FROB already held a majority equity stake , and that the core of the Spani sh banking 
system was relatively healthy (BdE 2017a). 
8. FROB issued three major rounds of support, first through convertible preferred 
shares (FROB I), then ordinary shares (FROB II), and finally both ordinary shares 
and contingent convertible securities (FROB III). 
FROB I 
The FROB was allowed to make capital injections to certain institutions that did not satisfy 
set conditions (See “Key Design Decision No. 6”) but still needed capital with which to  
integrate themselves with each other. As a condition of  the capital injection, these 
participating institutions had to improve their efficiency, administration, and management, 
 
6 See Oliver Wyman 2012. 
615
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 21 ---
as well as resize their productive capacity, preparing a merger or acquisition plan detailing 
these processes that w ere approved by th e Bank of Spain. These FROB capital injections 
were performed through acquisitions of preferred convertible shares in participatory 
quotas or portions of share capital (Official State Bulletin 2009). 
The first round was in March 2010 , when  the FROB issued €9.7 billion of convertible 
preference shares in the integration processes of Unnim, Catalunya Caixa, CEISS, 
Novacaixagalicia, Banco Financiero y de Ahorros, Banco Mare Nostrum, Banca Base, and 
Banca Cívica, and the restructuring of Cajasur . The restructur ing of Cajasur  consisted of 
purchasing €800 million of equity units and providing a €1.5 billion line of credit.  This set 
of interventions was not sufficient to address the problems in the saving bank sector, likely 
due to an incomplete write -off of capita l, the limited efficacy of convertible preference 
shares, and a general downturn in the economy ( Ponce Huerta 2019). In 2010 and 2011, 
the restructuring of the banking sector, and especially the savings bank sector , resulted in 
the merging of 42 of 45 bank s into 15 institutions, although three of the mergers occurred 
without FROB or Deposit Guarantee Fund aid (Caixa -Girona, Unicaja-Jaén, and Caja 3) (BdE 
2017a). 
FROB II 
Royal Decree -law 2/2011  authorized FROB II, raised capital requirements , and allowed 
FROB to recapitalize banks using ordinary shares. This law allowed FROB to subscribe 
ordinary shares under distressed market conditions to help entities that could not capture 
capital through traditional m arkets (Official State Bulletin 2011 ). FROB II injected €5.7 
billion in 2011 and 2012 to Catalunya Caixa, Novacaixagalici a, Unnim, and Banco de 
Valencia (Appendix E; IMF 2017; Ponce Huerta 2019). 
FROB II required entities to hold core capital equal to  8% risk-weighted assets (Official 
State Bulletin 2011 ). The standard was 10% for those entities that had more than 20% of 
their capital from wholesale financing and had less 20% of their capital in the possession of 
third parties. This allowed the FROB to par ticipate directly in recapitalized institutions’ 
boards of directors in proportion to its percentage of capital (BdE 2017 a). Entities 
recapitalized under FROB II that were noncompliant by more than 20% of the core capital 
requirement had to present recapitalization and business plans that committed to reducing 
structural costs, improving corporate governance and limiting bonuses, and modifying 
credit activity. 
The FROB’s acquisition of ordinary shares was conditional on the beneficiary’s preparation 
of a re capitalization plan that included a business plan and commitments to reduce 
structural costs, improve corporate governance , and have better credit activity . The FROB 
reported to the Ministry of Economy and Finance , detailing the financial impact of its 
acquisition of common stock.  The FROB could become part of the boards of directors of 
recapitalized entities in proportion to its share percentage. It could also still convert 
convertible preferred shares, as allowed in Royal Decree-law 9/2009. FROB contribut ions 
were made  through cash injections or the delivery of securities representing public debt 
(i.e., treasuries) or securities issued by FROB itself (Official State Bulletin 2011). 
616
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 22 ---
Conditions for recapitalization under FROB II included submitting a busines s plan and 
committing to reduce structural costs, improving corporate governance , and increasing 
financing to small and medium -sized companies. If a FROB II applicant had issued 
convertible preferred shares to FROB I, it could request an immediate conversion of those 
shares into ordinary shares or contributions to the share capital. Preferred shares 
subscribed before Royal Decree-law 2/2011 were to be governed by the law in effect when 
they were purchased. Independent directors were not allowed to  remain in their positions 
for more than 12 continuous years. The board had to create an internal commission or two 
separate committees o f appointments and remuneration. The former assessed the 
competencies and experiences of the board and its members and evaluate d candidates to 
fill vacancies, while the latter ensured compliance with the remuneration policy 
established by the company for d irectors, executives , and other managers. When a 
company acquired an entity with the help of FROB or deposit guarantee funds, it did not 
need to make a public tender offer, as was normally required according to Spanish law 
(Official State Bulletin 2011). 
FROB III 
FROB III occurred after the pass age of Law 9/2012, which established FROB’s powers as a 
resolution authority and allowed it to perform capital injections not only through ordinary 
shares but also through contingent convertible securities. About €41.3 billion was injected, 
of which €39 billion was used to recapitalize eight credit institutions for restructuring or 
resolution and €2.2 billion was used to purchase FROB’s stake and subordinated debt in 
Sareb, the asset management company for ba nk restructuring . FROB III was financed 
through European Stability Mechanism funding ( IMF 2017). Sareb acquired troubled real 
estate assets, which  reduced financial sector recapi talization requirements by €1.3  billion 
and restored confidence in financial i nstitutions (Ponce Huerta  2019). Shareholders and 
subordinated creditors incurred losses of about €14 billion, 70% of whom were retail 
investors who had acquired preference shares in somewhat opaque transactions.7 
The Memorandum of Understanding between the European Commission and Spain signed 
in 2012 formed a strategy to strengthen the Spanish banking sector. The MoU specified that 
a stress test conducted by independent consultants would determine capital shortfalls of 
individual banks and the system over all. This stress test categorized banks accordingly: 
Group 0  banks had no capital shortfall and required no intervention, Group 1  banks were 
already owned by the FROB (these were BFA/Bankia, Catalunya Caixa, NCG Banco, and 
Banco de Valencia), Group 2 banks had capital shortfalls that required public support, and 
Group 3 banks had capital shortfalls that could be met privately (EC 2012). 
Spanish authorities prepared restructuring plans for Group 1 banks in conjunction with the 
European Commission. These included BFA/Bankia, NCG Bank, Catalunya Bank, and Banco 
 
7 According to a commenter close to the program, most of the retail investors eventually recouped their 
investments through a specifically created deposit guarantee fund liquidity faci lity, arbitration procedures, 
and court rulings related to the sale of hybrid instruments. 
617
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 23 ---
de Valencia, which were recapitalized on December 26, 2012 , for a total of €36.9 billion.  
They also presented plans for Group 2 by October 2012 to the European Commission. Both 
involved moving impaired assets to an external asset management company (Sareb). Group 
2 banks included Banco Mare Nostrum, Caja 3,  España-Duero, and Liberbank, and they 
were injected with €1.865 billion on March 12, 2013. Caja 3 (which received €407 million), 
España-Duero (which received € 604 million), and Liberbank (which received €124 
million) were recapitalized using contingent convertible securities, while Banco Mare 
Nostrum was recapitalized with €730 million worth of shares.  Banco CEISS was also a 
Group 2 bank but was resolved after an injection of  €407 million of CoCos. Group 3 banks 
that were planning a significant equity raise (of more than 2% risk -weighted assets) could 
issue contingent convertible securities to FROB to meet their capital needs by December 
2012, though this was not used; Group 3 banks performed either private capital increases 
or asset reductions . They were redeemable until June 2013, if the bank succeeded in 
finding the necessary capital from private sources; if not, the FROB would convert them 
into equity and recapitalize the struggling bank. Group 3 banks planning a smaller equity 
raise were able to do so until June 2013. If they failed , they were recapitalized. Group 3 
banks that benefited from FROB support were required to t ransfer bad assets to Sareb ( EC 
2012). Banco Popular and Ibercaja were Group 3 banks (BdE 2017 a). According to a 
commenter close to the program, the choice between ordinary shares and CoCos depended 
on the viability of the entity after a capital injection. Banco CEISS  was under resolution and 
would normally have received an injection of ordinary shares ; however, as it had already 
agreed to integrate in Unicaja, the FROB subscribed CoCos instead of shares. 
Restructuring was done through financial support , the transfer of assets or liabilities to an 
asset management company (Sareb), or a combination of both strategies. Convertible share 
instruments were issued with conditions that included repurchase of the shares within five 
years and the exercise of conversion upon FROB ’s discretion of the entity’s solvency. This 
acquisition was priced relative to the economic value of the entity minus a discount in 
accordance with EU State Aid regulation. FROB purchased them with bonds issued by the 
European Stability Mechanism. The FRO B’s voting rights and board participation were 
determined by the proportion of shares it acquire d in an entity. The FROB also imposed 
losses on private shareholders of hybrid capital and subordinated debt to support the 
recapitalization plans of credit ins titutions, including offers to exchange it for capital 
instruments, offers to repurchase issued securities, reduction of the nominal value of debt , 
and early amortization of debt at a value other than the nominal value . FROB III also 
created and  asset mana gement company to which to transfer bad assets (Sareb) (Official 
State Bulletin 2012).8 
The FROB could sell  shares, as well as assets and liabilities , to third parties  through a 
transparent, speedy, and impartial process that avoid ed conflicts of interest while 
maximizing sale price and minimizi ng the use of public resources ( Official State Bulletin 
 
8 See Tam 2021. 
618
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 24 ---
2012). However, commenters from the program said that while FROB could have sold its 
CoCos, it held them until the issuers repurchased them. 
After FROB III 
Law 11/2015 added to FROB’s recapitalization arsenal the ability to orchestrate internal 
recapitalization of an insolvent entity (Official State Bulletin 2015 ). In response to the 
European Single Resolution Mechani sm (SRM) of 2014, the l aw also created  the Single 
Resolution Board and National Resolution Fund, which help ed synchronize Spanish 
resolution policies with those of Europe as a whole . This allowed  FROB to require that 
losses be borne internally through the write -down or conversion of capital instruments, or 
via bail-in by other eligible liability (BdE 201 5). To make sure the first was sufficient to 
absorb losses, resolution authorities set a minimum requirement for own funds and eligible 
liabilities for each institution. 
9. There were no explicit individual participation limits. 
Research did not reveal any limits on individual participation. 
10. The acquisition of shares or quotas by the FROB require d the cancellation of 
preemptive subscription rights of existing shareholders or quota participants. 
When the FROB acquired participatory quotas of a bank, it had the right to representation 
at shareholders’ meetings equivalent to the percentage of equity they own ed (Official State 
Bulletin 2009 ). This right was maintained throughout t he FROB’s possession of these 
securities and was not transferred to any subsequent acquirers. Similarly, the FROB’s 
voting rights in the assembly of a credit unio n to which it ha d contributed were  
proportional to its contributions with respect to the total capital stock of the credit union. 
The cancellation of voting rights for existing shareholders happened at the time of the 
adoption of the capital increase or quota issuance agreement (Official State Bulletin 2009 ). 
The status of different parties and how they bore losses was established in Law 9/2012, 
Chapter I, Article 4. They were as follows: 
(a) The shareholders or partners of the entities were the first to bear losses. 
(b) The provider s of subordinated debt bore  losses arising from restructuring or 
resolution after shareholders, according to the order of priority established in 
bankruptcy legislation, though the exceptions established in this law took 
precedence. 
(c) Creditors of the same rank were treated th e same u nless this act indicated  an 
exception. 
(d) A creditor did not bear  a loss gre ater than the loss s/he would have borne  if the 
entity were liquidated in a bankruptcy proceeding. 
(e) If an entity was resolved, its administrators were replaced. 
619
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 25 ---
(f) The administrat ors of t he credit institutions we re liable for damages caused, in 
proportion to their participation and the severity of the damages. 
FROB was not  included as a shareholder in allocations of losses or protections for 
shareholders or partners. 
If a credit institutio n wa s resolved, FROB was permitted to transfer shares or capital 
instruments to a third party without obtaining the consent of the shareholders ( Official 
State Bulletin 2012 ). The sale price  deducted the administrative and other expenses 
incurred by FROB including the costs of financial support instruments that were previously 
reimbursed to FROB. 
Law 11/2015 later modified this loss structure as follows (Article 4). 
(a) The shareholders or partners, as appropriate, of the entities were the first to bear 
losses. 
(b) The creditors of the entities bore, where appropriate, losses arising from the 
resolution after the shareholders or partners and in accordance with the order of 
priority established in the bankruptcy legislation, with the exceptions established in 
this law. 
(c) Creditors of the same rank were treated in an equivalent manner unless otherwise 
provided in this act. 
(d) No shareholder or creditor bore losses greater than what they would have borne if 
the entity were liquidated in the context of a bankruptcy proceeding. 
(e) The directors and general or similar directors of the entity were replaced, unless, on 
an excep tional basis, its maintenance was  considered strictly necessary to ach ieve 
the objectives of the resolution. 
(f) The directors and general or similar directors of the entity had to  provide all 
necessary assistance to achieve the objectives of the resolution. 
(g) In accordance with the provisions of bankruptcy, commercial , and crimin al 
legislation, the administrators of the entities and any other natural or legal person 
were liable for the damages caused in proportion to their participation and the 
seriousness of those. 
(h) Guaranteed deposits were fully protected. 
(i) The resolution measures  adopted were accompanied by the corresponding 
guarantees and safeguards provided for in this law and its development regulations. 
Since Law 11/2015 also formalized the write -down of capital and bail -in mechanisms, it 
delineates the treatment of shareholde rs in the case of internal recapitaliz ation. The FROB 
could amortize existing or transfer to creditors capital instruments and eligible liabilities of 
620
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 26 ---
the entity at a reduced nominal value. The sequence to which capital or liabilities were 
amortized was as follows (Official State Bulletin 2015): 
(a) The elements of Level 1 ordinary capital proportional to the losses and as far as 
possible, 
(b) The principal amount of the Level 1 additional capital instruments to the extent 
necessary and to the extent possible, 
(c) The principal amount of Level 2 capital instruments to the extent necessary and to 
the extent possible, 
(d) The principal amount of the subordinated debt that was not additional capital of 
Level 1 or 2, then 
(e) The principal amount or the outstanding amount of the admissible liabilities, in 
accordance with the priority of the credit rights provided in the applicable 
bankruptcy regulations. 
Capital or eligible liabilities of the same rank had losses equitably distributed amongst 
them. The FROB was a lso was able to reorganize the activity of the entity. Only after these 
methods had been exercised could the National Resolution Fund contribute to the entity to 
cover any loss that remains or acquire shares or other capital instruments in order to 
recapitalize it (Official State Bulletin 2015). 
Institutions that were recapitalized had to go through a hybrid instrument loss -sharing 
exercise for shareholders and preferred shareholder s. Most of these arrangements were 
compulsory and generally required a recapitalized institution to repurchase preferred 
shares and subordinated debt at a haircut  of 26% , on average. Shareholders receive d 
shares or mandatorily convertible bonds, while subordinated debt holders receive d senior 
debt instruments with a haircut. To limit the burden on retail investors and give them 
liquidity, the Deposit Guarantee Fund was empowered to acquire the shares those 
investors received  and did so to the tune of €1.8 billion. A committee was created to 
determine the compensation that bank s owned by FROB could dispense in response to 
disputes from customers suing for damages (BdE 2017a). 
11. Exit Strategy: FROB exited from some of its capital injections through repurchase 
of shares and sale of shares to a third party. 
Under FROB I, i n the cases  where the Bank of Spain allowed the FROB to replace the 
management of the credit institution, FROB was responsible for declaring bankruptcy 
(Official State Bulletin 2009). 
The FROB divested from these participations by either repurchase of shares by the issuing 
entity or transference of shares to third parties . This divestiture was designed in a way to 
minimize competition and had be completed  within five years of the date of compliance of 
the integration plan). The recapitalized entity had to issue quarterly reports on the merger 
or acquisition to the Bank of Spain; if it was unable fulfill said plan, the FROB modified its 
621
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 27 ---
terms and extend ed its repurchase term s by up to two years. Credit in stitutions that 
fulfilled the requirements of eligible institutions above but failed to perform their merger 
plans were still eligible for FROB aid (Official State Bulletin 2009). 
For ordinary shares associated with FROB II, divestment occurred within a maximum term 
of five years. The FROB was allowed to resell securities to the issuing entity or third parties 
proposed by the beneficiary entity within one year of the acquisition. Th e maximum term 
was two years, in which case it could require the beneficiary to adhere to additional terms. 
The conditions of resale had to ensure efficient use of public funds and be carried out under 
market conditions, while complying with Spanish and EU regulations, especially that 
concerning State Aid.  However, the divestment of contributions to capital stock was not  
subject to any legal or statutory limitations (Official State Bulletin 2011). 
These participating institutions had to commit to repurchasing the preferred shares he ld 
by the FROB as soon as they we re able. If five years passed without a repurchase, the FROB 
could request conversion into common shares , participatory fees, or dividends within six 
months after the five -year mark. The FROB could also convert sh ares earlier if repurchase 
seemed unlikely, and the cre dit institution had to follow all other conditions in the merger 
or acquisition plan. 
As of 2021, FROB still owns 16.12% of CaixaBank shares (previously approximately 61% of 
Bankia shares) (Ponce Huerta 2019). 
12. In 2012 , FROB gained authority to resolve unvi able institutions and create an 
early action program to improve their health before they required  government 
intervention. 
In 2012, the FROB gained authority to resolve  unviable institutions and create an early 
action program to improve their health prior to their requiring government intervention. 
This occurred under Law 9/ 2012 in response to the MOU signed with the E uropean 
Commission to receive Eu ropean Stability Mechanism fund s. It gave the FROB powers to 
value institutions, as well as restructure those  that required public financial support to 
maintain viability, but it was mandated to minimize the amount of public resources used to 
maintain financial stability ( Official State Bulletin 2012 ). It also established an asset 
management company for bank restructuring, Sareb (see Tam 2021). 
Under the law, t he FROB use d four tools individually or jointly to facilitate resolution of a 
credit entity: the sale of the entity’s business, the transfer of assets and liabilities to a 
bridge bank, the transfer o f assets and liabilities to an asset management company, or 
financial support to the purchasers to the business (including the bridge bank 9 or asset 
management company mentioned in the previous tools) (Official State Bulletin 2012). 
 
9 A bridge bank for the purposes of this case study  was a credit institution, including the entity itself in 
resolution in which the FROB participate d (Official State Bulletin 2012 ). The bridge bank had to comply with 
regulations and supervision applicable to credit institutions. The total value of liabilities transmitted to the 
 
622
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 28 ---
The 2015 law transposing t he European Commission’s  bank recovery and resolution 
directive to Spain built upon the 2012 law formalizing the processes of resolution . The 
FROB was now able to work toward an entity’s survival while resolving the unviable parts 
of it. In accordance with  the European Single Resolution Mechanism, the 2015 law also 
established the National Resolution Fund, which was responsible for financing the 
resolution processes of financial entities. The National Resolution Fund was administered 
by the FROB and was req uired to  constitute at least 1% of guaranteed deposits of all 
entities (Official State Bulletin 2015 ). To fund it, the FROB collect ed annual ordinary 
contribution from entities and branches in Spain of EU entities proportional to their 
liabilities, relative to the total liabilities of all entities, and their specific risk profiles. 
Law 11/2015 also provided for an early action mechanism that monitored banks in order 
to help internally recover institutions that were likely to fail capital  requirements. The 
supervisors of this process were the Bank of Spain, European Central Bank, or National 
Securities Market Commission (Official State Bulletin 2015 ). This preventative action was 
intended to streamline the operations of an entity to reduce risk of insolvency and facilitate 
its resolution, if needed, while shifting the burden of financing from the government to the 
financial industry itself. 
To ensure that bank failures wouldn’t cause systemic issues, the 2015 law also required 
contingent resolution plans for entities that were not under the FROB in a scenario where 
no public support was available. This law also empowered the FROB to perform capital 
increase or reduction operations, amortize capital instruments , or perform internal 
recapitalization (Official State Bulletin 2015). 
The resolution of a credit institution was pursued when two criteria exist ed: the credit 
institution was unviable or soon would be unviable, and it was in the public interest and 
convenience to resolve the institution to maintain financial stability, protect creditors , and 
limit external damage. A credit institution was unviable in the  following circumstances: 
when it breached solvency requirements, its required liabilities exceed ed its assets, or it 
was una ble to  fulfill its enforceable obligations in a timely manner —and it could not  
remedy these circumstances by use of its own means, private markets, or restructuring aid 
(Official State Bulletin 2012). 
Resolution proceeded when the entity did not present a restructuring plan or 
demonstrated its own unviability, presented an inadequate plan, or did not execute aspects 
of the plan within the timeframe established by the Bank of Spain and the FROB. The Bank 
 
bridge bank was not to exceed the value of assets transmitted from the ent ity or from any other  source, 
including the financial support it received. The FROB was able to exercise this clause m ore than once in favor 
of more than one bridge bank, as well as transfer assets and liabilities to third parties. The FROB manage d the 
bridge bank with the objective of selling it or its assets and liabilities within five years when conditions were 
appropriate. This sale was to be done under competitive market conditions. The bridge bank cease d to exist 
after one year from FROB’s exi t, or after all assets and liabilities were sold. This therefore occur red within six 
years of its founding, or the FROB liquidated it. 
623
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 29 ---
of Spain began resolution processes by reporting its d ecision to the FROB, Ministry of 
Economy and Competitiveness, and where appropriate, the European Union and European 
Banking Authority. The Bank of Spain  then designated FROB as administrator of the entity. 
Within two months (the Bank of Spain could extend this deadline to six months), the FROB 
prepared a resolution scheme for the entity to be approved by the Bank of Spain; the 
scheme had to include the reason for resolut ion, the resolution instruments to be 
implemented, the commitments adopted to minimize the use of public resources and 
distortion of competition, the financial support measures to be implemented by the deposit 
guarantee fund for credit institutions , the ec onomic valuation of the entity and its balance 
sheet, the management actions of the capital and subordinated debt instruments to be 
carried out, and the maximum execution period ( Official State Bulletin 2012 ). The Bank of 
Spain had authority to  impose addi tional requirements on entities under resolution 
processes. 
The criteria for the resolution of an entity under Law 11/2015 were similar to those in Law 
9/2012 with the addition that an entity that was unviable might also be defined as an entity 
that needed extraordinary public financial assistance (Official State Bulletin 2015). 
Post-FROB III Resolution 
After FROB III, the FROB also resolved Caja Rural Mota del Cuervo, Sociedad Cooperativa de 
Crédito de Castilla-La Mancha, a small rural credit cooperative that held less than one ten 
thousandth of the assets in the Spanish banking system (about €82.55 million). This was 
done in 2014 by selling it to Globalcaja in an emergency procedure, without any pub lic 
funds, to maintain confidence in the sector. In 2015, due to concerns about money 
laundering in an Andorran institution, BPA, the FROB considered intervening in its 
subsidiary, Banco Madrid, which had a balance sheet of €1.3 billion. The FROB concluded  
that a resolution through restructuring was inappropriate, and this resulted in the only 
exercise of the Deposit Guarantee Fund in Spain during the recent financial crisis , and most 
payments were executed without any problems . However, the court that was intended to 
advise voluntary insolvency procedures for Banco Madrid still has not handed down a 
ruling (Ponce Huerta 2019). 
III. Evaluation 
The IMF assesse s the FROB’s activities post -2012 as largely positive, contributing to a 
stronger economy, a more stable f inancial sector, and reduced risk  (IMF 2017 ). The IMF 
praises the additions of bail -in restructuring processes, banking reforms , corporate 
governance replacements, and overall economic reforms as successful. However, the FROB 
still faces losses on Sareb and the possibility of general economic issues. 
The European Stability Mechanism, which disbursed a €41.3 billion loan to the FROB in 
2012–13, sees the FROB’s subsequent actions as well  prepared to define the scope of  
necessary measures to repair the banking sector (Strauch  2019). This was done by 
including strategies such as improving bank governance, transparency, and supervision, as 
well as the  creation of Sareb, in addition to capital and funding policies. The ESM and 
624
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 30 ---
European Commission also have supported other Spanish reforms in the labor market as 
well as fiscal and pensions  reform. Immediate results of the FROB activity were visible in 
the quick stabilization of market access in the banking sector, the decrease in funding costs, 
and bank consolidations; the number of cajas fell from 45 to two. Banks stabilized 
profitability, reduced holdings of nonperforming loans , increased capital, and diminished 
exposure to the  real estate sector by use of the asset managemen t company, Sareb. Long -
term success is seen in Spain’s return to economic growth in 2014, an area in which it 
outperformed the euro area  average. Employment increases, competitiveness gains, 
economic rebalancing, increased exports, and a current account su rplus indicate an 
economic recovery reflected in rating upgrades and low borrowing costs for Spain. 
The FROB created new merged banks that were more solvent and better managed than the 
insolvent cajas that preceded them ( de Juan  2019). However, more than 1 0% of banks’ 
loans were nonperforming as of 2019 , and the post -crisis economy still contains lower 
volumes of credit. This number ha d lowered to 4.5% of loans being nonperforming as of 
January 2021. De Juan believes that low returns are compounded by the instability caused 
by easy monetary policy and deregulation. The restructuring activity was significant, as the 
banks that received public support accounted for 18% of total assets (Ponce Huerta  2019). 
In 2012, total deposits at Spanish banks amounted to €1 .3 trillion, of which €700 billion 
was covered by the Deposit Guarantee Fund; of that amount, €250 billion was at banks that 
received recapitalization aid. 
The EU has concluded that the FROB helped improve the resilience of the banking system 
and reduced the risks of financial instability. It notes that emergency recapitalization and 
burden sharing for losses are important aspects of FROB’s powers . It also commend s the 
FROB for adapting to changing international standards. These measures for stability are 
balanced with efficiency, as they reduce the potential burden on public finances and the 
negative impacts on restructured banks.  The restructuring processes of Spanish banks 
were timely, occurring less than six months after EU State Aid rules were adopted. This was 
key to restoring confidence in the Spanish banking system, and maintaining macrofinancial 
stability, in conjunction with European and Spanish policies (EC 2016). 
Former FROB Chairman Jaime Ponce Huerta reported in spring 2019 that t he FROB’s 
ability to repay the Spanish government depends on three factors. First  is the pending 
divestment of an indirect 61% stake in Bankia, following its merger in BMN , by the legal 
deadline of December 2021. This merger has created a bank of about €230 billion in 
assets—the aim is to improve recovery value for FROB and private investors (which hold 
around 35% of total shares). Second is the performance of Sareb, which i s subject to risk 
from the performance of the real estate market itself, as well as the rate of divestment and 
the ability to absorb assets, high financial costs, and high overheads . Third is th e behavior 
of guarantees offered by FROB in the divestment pro cess, which, if significantly different 
than the expected loss of €2.5 billion , may also affect FROB’s ability to repay its debt . 
Though Spain did use a great deal of capital aid (between 5 % and 6% of GDP) relative to 
other European countries, the profitab ility and efficiency of Span ish banks has improved 
greatly (Ponce Huerta 2019). 
625
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 31 ---
As of December 2016, uncertainty remained about the legal contingencies the FROB faced 
on guarantees it had granted to the acquiring institutions of resolved banks, including 
those against the ruling by the European Court on the floor clauses of bank mortgage  
interest rates, as these potential losses must be absorbed by FROB (IMF 2017). 
However, Spain also faces the challenges of high public debt ; unemployment that is higher 
than the that of the euro area , on average ; low productivity ; and significant net external 
liabilities. Losses from Sareb also have exceeded expectations, and the privatization of 
Bankia and caja s reform are still incomplete  (EC 2019). Banks also face profitability 
pressure from price correction of assets and the low -interest-rate environment. However, 
Rolf Strauch, chief economist of the ESM, views Spain as a “European success story in 
overcoming the crisis” and is certain in its ability to overcome th ese challenges. The 
Spanish stability program was the first that was supported by the European Stability 
Mechanism, and Strauch believe s that this intervention demonstrates the ESM’s success in 
protecting the euro area (Strauch 2019). 
The European Commission remains concerned about the quality of banks’ loan portfolios, 
which reflect a nonperforming loan ratio above 10% of total loans, and increases in 
foreclosed assets (EC 2016). 
On the other hand, Ponce Huerta  states that b y creating a resolution infrastructure that 
focuses on prevention and planning compatible with the European framework  and that is 
financed by the banks themselves, Spain seeks to avoid the difficulties faced by European 
countries due to failing banks in the financial  crisis (Ponce Huerta 2019). Spain separates 
the supervision authorities from the FROB ’s resolution authorities. As shown in Figure 5 
below, there are three resolution authorities in Spain; the Bank of Spain and CNMV are 
preventative resolution authorities  for banks and investment companies , respectively, 
while FROB is an executive resolution authority. 
  
626
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 5: Institutional Architecture of Supervision and Resolution in Spain 
 
Source: Ponce Huerta 2019. 
  
627
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 33 ---
IV. References 
Banco de España ( BdE). 2015. Report on Banking Supervision in Spain 2014.  Madrid: Banco 
de España, Eurosistema, July 21, 2015.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BdE%202014.pdf. 
———. 2017a. Report on the Financial and Banking Crisis in Spain , 2008-2014.Madrid: 
Banco de España, Eurosistema, May 2017.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BdE%202017a.pdf. 
———. 2017b. Informative Note about Financial Assistance in the Process of Restructuring 
the Spanish Banking System (2009 -2016). Madrid: Banco de España, Eurosistema, 
September 7, 2017.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/informative-note-about-financial-help-restructuring-
process-spanish-banking-system. 
———. 2019. “Briefing Note on Financial Assistance in the Re structuring of the Spanish 
Banking System (2009-2018).” Briefing note, November 20, 2019.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/notabe201119en.pdf. 
de Juan , Aristóbulo. 2019 . “From Good to Bad Bankers: Lessons Learned from a 50 -Year 
Career in Banking.” Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, March 22, 2019.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/deJuan_onepage.pdf. 
Europa Press. 2011. “Noticia Congreso Convalida Decreto Recapitalizar Banca ,”  March 10, 
2011.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/EuropaPress.pdf. 
European Commission (EC). 2010. “State Aid: Commission Approves Spanish Restructuring 
Aid for Caja Castilla-La Mancha.” Press release, June 29, 2010.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/State_aid__Commission_app
roves_Spanish_restructuring_aid_for_Caja_Castilla-La_Mancha.pdf. 
———. 2012. “ Spain: Memorandum of Understanding on Financial -Sector Policy 
Conditionality.” July 20, 2012.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/2012-07-20-spain-
mou_en.pdf. 
———. 2016. Evaluation of the Financial Sector Assistance Programme : Spain, 2012 -
2104.  Institutional Paper No. 019. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European U nion, 
2016.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/ip019_en_2.pdf. 
———. 2019.Post-Programme Surveillance Report : Spain, Spring 2019 .  Institutional Paper 
No. 106. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, July 2019.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/ip106_en_1.pdf. 
628
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 34 ---
Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB). n.d. Website: “Annual Accounts.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/frob-annual-accounts. 
———. 2018. “Annual Report 2018.”   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/20190610%20Mactividades
FROB2018_EN.pdf. 
———. 2019. 10 Years of FROB, 2009-2019: A Decade for Financial Stability . Madrid: FROB, 
March 2019.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/10-years-frob-2009-2019. 
Fontevecchia, Agustino. 2012. “Spanish Bank Stress Tests Dramatically Underestimate 
Capital Shortfall.” Forbes, June 27, 2012.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Forbes.pdf. 
International Monetary Fund  (IMF). 2012 a. “Spain: Financial Stability Assessment.” IMF 
Country Report No. 12/137, June 2012.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/IMF.pdf. 
———. 2012b. “Spain: Safety Net, Bank Resolution, and Crisis Management Framework —
Technical Note.”  IMF Country Report No. 12/145, June 2012.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/cr12145.pdf. 
———. 2017. “Spain: Financial S ector Assessment Program ; Technical Note —Impaired 
Assets and Nonperforming Loans.” IMF Country Report No. 17/343, November 13, 2017.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/cr17343%20(3).pdf. 
Official State Bulletin. 1977. “Royal Decree-Law 3047/1977.” November 11, 1977.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/royal-decree-30471977-which-creates-deposit-
guarantee-fund-savings-banks. 
———. 2009. “Royal Decree-Law 9/2009.” June 26, 2009.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/rdl_009_2009.pdf. 
———. 2011. “Royal Decree-Law 2/2011.” February 18, 2011.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BOE-A-2011-3254-
consolidado.pdf. 
———. 2012. “Law 9/2012.” November 14, 2012.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BOE-A-2012-14062.pdf. 
———. 2015. “Law 11/2015.” June 18, 2015.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BOE-A-2015-6789-
consolidado.pdf. 
Mayer Brown. 2009. “Summary of Government Interventions: Spain.” April 21, 2009.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/0263fin_Summary_Govern
ment_Interventions_Spain.pdf. 
629
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 35 ---
Oliver Wyman. 2012. Asset Quality Review and Bottom -Up Stress Test Exercise . Madrid: 
Marsh & McLennan Companies. September 28, 2012.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/informe_ow280912e.pdf. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2012. OECD Economic 
Surveys: Spain 2012. Paris: OECD Publishing, November 2012.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/OECD%20One%20pager.pd
f. 
Ponce Huerta, Jaime. 2019. “FROB in the Restructuring of the Spanish Banking System. 
Where It Stands after a Decade of Activity (2009-2019) and Considerations for the Banking 
Union.” Financial Stability Review 36 (Spring): 23–44.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/FROB_in_the_restructuring.
pdf. 
Segovia, Carlos. 2017. “The Government comes to the Rescue of the Bank Rescue Fund with 
an Injection.” El Mundo, June 20, 2017.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/El%20Gobierno%20sale%2
0al%20'rescate'%20del%20fondo%20de%20rescate%20bancario%20con%20una%20iny
eccio%CC%81n%20de%203.000%20millones%20_%20Economia%20Home%20_%20EL
%20MUNDO.pdf. 
Strauch, Rolf. 2019. “The Spanish Financial Sector Assistance Programme: 7 Years Later.” 
Speech delivered at the European Stability Mechanism seminar, Madrid, October 7, 2019.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/The%20Spanish%20Financ
ial%20Sector%20Assistance%20programme_%207%20years%20later%20-
%20speech%20by%20Rolf%20Strauch%20_%20European%20Stability%20Mechanism.p
df.  
Tam, David and Fulmer, Sean. 2021. "Spain: Sociedad de Gestión de Activos procedentes de 
la Reestructuración Bancaria (SAREB)," The Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 2, 726 -
756. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/30. 
V. Key Program Documents 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(EC 2012) Spain: Memorandum of Understanding on Financial -Sector Policy Conditionality   
Memorandum of Understanding between Spain and the European Commission regarding 
FROB. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/2012-07-20-spain-
mou_en.pdf. 
(Official State Bulletin 1977) Royal Decree-Law 3047/1977   
Law creating Spanish deposit guarantee fund.  
630
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 36 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/royal-decree-30471977-which-creates-deposit-
guarantee-fund-savings-banks. 
(Official State Bulletin 2009 ) Royal Decree-law 9/2009   
Law establishing FROB.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/rdl_009_2009.pdf. 
(Official State Bulletin 2011) Royal Decree-law 2/2011   
Law expanding FROB’s powers before the second round of capital injections.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BOE-A-2011-3254-
consolidado.pdf. 
(Official State Bulletin 2012). Official State Bulletin 2012   
Law expanding FROB’s powers before the third round of capital injections.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BOE-A-2012-14062.pdf. 
(Official State  Bulletin 2015)Official State Bulletin 2015   
Most recent legal change to FROB and its resolution powers after usage in the financial crisis.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BOE-A-2015-6789-
consolidado.pdf. 
Media Stories 
(Europa Press 2011) News Congress Validates Banking Recapitalization Decree   
Article on the passage of a law expanding FROB’s powers ahead of the second round of capital 
injections  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/EuropaPress.pdf. 
(Segovia 2017) The Government comes to the Rescue of the Bank Rescue Fund with an 
Injection  
Article on the Treasury converting its loan to FROB into equity.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/El%20Gobierno%20sale%2
0al%20'rescate'%20del%20fondo%20de%20rescate%20bancario%20con%20una%20iny
eccio%CC%81n%20de%203.000%20millones%20_%20Economia%20Home%20_%20EL
%20MUNDO.pdf. 
(Strauch 2019) The Spanish Financial Sector Assistance Programme: 7 Years Later  
Speech by Rolf Strauch on the Spanish assistance in response to the 2008 crisis.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/The%20Spanish%20Financ
ial%20Sector%20Assistance%20programme_%207%20years%20later%20-
%20speech%20by%20Rolf%20Strauch%20_%20European%20Stability%20Mechanism.p
df. 
Reports/Assessments 
(BdE 2015) Report on Banking Supervision in Spain 2014   
Bank of Spain report on banking supervision in Spain.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BdE%202014.pdf. 
631
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 37 ---
(BdE 2017a) Report on the Financial and Banking Crisis in Spain, 2008-2014   
Bank of Spain report on the banking crisis in Spain.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/BdE%202017a.pdf. 
(BdE 2017b) Informative Note about Financial Assistance in the Process of Restructuring 
the Spanish Banking System (2009-2016)   
Note about restructuring in the Spanish banking system.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/informative-note-about-financial-help-restructuring-
process-spanish-banking-system. 
(BdE 2019) Briefing Note on Financial Assistance in the Restructuring of the Spanis h 
Banking System (2009-2018)   
Paper on government bank restructuring policies between 2009 and 2018.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/notabe201119en.pdf. 
(EC 2016) Evaluation of the Financial Sector Assistance Programme: Spain, 2012-2014   
Paper evaluating Spanish financial sector assistance.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/ip019_en_2.pdf. 
(EC 2019) Post-Programme Surveillance Report: Spain, Spring 2019   
European Commission paper on assistance to Spain during the financial crisis.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/ip106_en_1.pdf. 
(IMF 2012b) Spain: Financial Stability Assessment  
International Monetary Fund paper assessing Spain’s financial stability.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/spain-financial-stability-assessment. 
(IMF 20 12b) Spain: Safety Net, Bank Resolution, and Crisis Mana gement Framework —
Technical Note  
International Monetary Fund paper assessing Spain’s crisis management framework.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/cr12145.pdf. 
(IMF 2017b) Spain: Financial Sector Assessment Program; Technical Note —Impaired 
Assets and Nonperforming Loans   
International Monetary Fund paper on assessing the health of Spain’s financial sector.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/cr17343%20(3).pdf. 
(IMF 2017c) Spain: Financial System Stability Assessment   
International Monetary Fund paper assessing Spain’s financial stability.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/cr17321.pdf. 
(IMF 2018) Spain: IMF Staff Concluding Statement of the 2018 Article IV Mission   
International Monetary Fund paper assessing Spain’s economy.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Spain_%20IMF%20Staff%2
0Concluding%20Statement%20of%20the%202018%20Article%20IV%20Mission.pdf. 
(Mayer Brown 2009) Summary of Government Interventions: Spain  
Mayer Brown report on Spain’s financial interventions during the global financial crisis.  
632
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 38 ---
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/0263fin_Summary_Govern
ment_Interventions_Spain.pdf. 
 
  
633
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 39 ---
VI. Appendixes 
Appendix A: FROB Programs between 2009 –12 and Sareb’s 
Asset Purchases 
 
Source: IMF 2017. 
  
634
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 40 ---
Appendix B: Chronological Summary of S panish Interventions 
2008–11 
Chronological Summary of Spanish Interventions 2008–11  
October 10, 2008: Royal Decree-law  6/2008, which created Fondo para la Adquisición de 
Activos Financieros (FAAF) 
October 10, 2008: Royal Decree -law 1642/2008, which reformed the deposit guarantee 
funds 
October 13, 2008: Royal Decree-law 7/2008, on urgent financial and economic measures 
June 26, 20 09: Royal Decree -law 9/2009 , which created the Fondo de Reestructuración 
Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) 
June 29, 2010: Bank of Spain Circular 3/2010, amending Circular 4/2004 (on December 
22) on public and reserved financial information standards, and models of financial 
statements 
July 9, 2010: Royal Decree-law 11/2010, on the reform of the savings bank sector 
February 18, 2011: Royal Decree-law 2/2011, on strengthening the solvency requirements 
of credit institutions 
June 3, 2011: Royal Decree -law 771/2011, mod ifying Royal Decree -law 216/2008 (on 
February 15), on the resources of financial institutions , and Royal Decree-law  2606/1996 
(on December 20), about deposit guarantee funds of credit institutions 
October 14, 2011: Royal Decree-law  16/2011, reuniting the three deposit guarantee funds. 
November 30, 2011: Bank of Spain Circular 5/2011, modifying Circular 4/2004 (on 
December 22) about standards for public and reserved financial information and models of 
financial statements 
Source: (BdE 2017a).  
  
635
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 41 ---
Appendix C: FROB I Involvements 
 
Source: BdE 2017a. 
  
636
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 42 ---
Appendix D: Savings Bank Sector and FROB/FGD 
 
Source: BdE 2017a. 
  
637
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 43 ---
Appendix E: FROB II Support Initially Committed 
 
Source: FROB 2019. 
 
  
638
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 44 ---
Appendix F: FROB II Support Injected 
 
Source: FROB 2019. 
  
639
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 45 ---
Appendix G: FROB Losses 
 
640
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 46 ---
Note: According to a commenter familiar with FROB, this table reflects a specific situation 
as of the end of 2018. The €9.560 billion recoverable amount stated for BFA -Bankia 
(footnoted), though the Bank of Spain  states as the amount that FROB estimates in its 
annual accounts, is not such: €9.560 billion is the accounting value that FROB registered in 
its annual accounts, based on the book value of the entity as of December 2018. 
Source: BdE 2019. 
  
641
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 47 ---
Appendix H: FROB Bailouts 
 
Source: FROB 2018. 
 
 
  
642
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 48 ---
Appendix I: Functions of FROB 
 
Source: FROB 2018.  
  
643
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 49 ---
Appendix J: Timeline of Spanish Banking Sector 
 
Source: EC 2012. 
 
644
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 50 ---
Appendix K: Timeline of FROB Activities 
 
Source: Ponce Huerta 2019.  
 
645
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 51 ---
Appendix L: FROB 2009–16 Finances 
 
Source: IMF 2017. 
  
646
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 52 ---
Appendix M: Stress Test Plans for FROB III 
 
Source: BdE 2017a. 
  
647
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 53 ---
Appendix N: Full Summary of FROB Purchases and Divestments 
 
Source: BdE 2017a. 
  
648
Spain – Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (FROB) Capital Injections Sankar

--- Page 54 ---
Copyright 2020, 2021 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to 
receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on 
Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
649
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3