--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 2 
2021 
United Kingdom Asset Resolution Limited (UKAR) United Kingdom Asset Resolution Limited (UKAR) 
Aidan Lawson 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lawson, Aidan (2021) "United Kingdom Asset Resolution Limited (UKAR)," Journal of Financial Crises: 
Vol. 3 : Iss. 2, 641-664. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1173 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/28 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss2/28

--- Page 3 ---
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited (UKAR)1 
Aidan Lawson2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
August 23, 2019; Revised: June 23, 2021 
Abstract 
As the Global Financial Crisis began to unfold, the United Kingdom (UK) saw two of its largest 
mortgage lenders in Bradford & Bingley (B&B) and Northern Rock begin to weaken 
dramatically under the pressure that housing and financial markets were facing. No rthern 
Rock and B&B both faced severe funding problems due to a worsening global credit crunch 
and both would be nationalized in 2008 . Despite this effort, the crisis continued to worsen 
globally, and the UK government created UK Asset Resolution Limited (UKAR) on October 1, 
2010. This organization’s goal was to wind down and maximize the return on the £115.8 
billion in mortgages and other assets that the government still had from B&B and what was 
now Northern Rock Asset Management . The government transferred those assets to UKAR 
along with B&B’s and NRAM’s associated liabilities, including loans from HM Treasury and 
the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) with a principal of £48.7 billion at the 
end of 2010. UKAR has been able to consistently reduce its balance sheet and turn a profit 
every year since its inception. As of June 2019, the company made approximately £8.1 billion 
in profit, as well as paying off the entirety of its government loans . More recently , the 
company also sold off all of its assets and equity interest, thus ending government ownership 
of B&B and Northern Rock in February 2021.  
Keywords: UK Asset Resolution, UKAR, United Kingdom, Resolution, asset management 
companies, AMCs, broad-based asset management
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering the responses to the global financial crisis that pertain to broad-based asset management 
programs. 
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of- 
financial-crises/. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
641

--- Page 4 ---
At a Glance  
As the Global Financial Crisis began to unfold, 
the UK saw two of its largest financial 
institutions in Bradford & Bingley (B&B) and 
Northern Rock, begin to weaken dramatically 
under the pressure that housing and financial 
markets were facing. These firms  faced 
severe funding problems due to a global 
credit crunch and would subsequently be 
nationalized in 2008. 
Despite this effort, the crisis continued to 
worsen globally, and, amongst other 
programs that the UK government instituted, 
it created UK Asset Resolution Limited 
(UKAR) on October 1, 2010 (UKAR, n.d.). This 
organization’s goal was to wind down an d 
maximize the return on the £115.8 billion in 
mortgages and other assets that the 
government still had from B&B and what was 
now Northern Rock Asset Management  
(NRAM) (UKAR 2019b). It also held the UK’s 
stakes in B&B and NRAM. 
The government transferred those assets to 
UKAR along with B&B’s and NRAM’s 
associated liabilities, which included loans 
from HM Treasury and the Financial Services 
Compensation Scheme (FSCS) totaling £48.7 
billion (UKAR 2012). UKAR was not able to  
write n ew loans, thus its primary goal was 
careful and timely management and 
disposition of the assets on its balance sheet  
while maximizing taxpayer return (UKAR 2013).  
UKAR used competitive sales, buy-backs, and loan redemptions to dispose of its assets  
(UKAR 2018c) . To inform  its disposition decisions, UKAR engaged in a communication 
strategy that focused primarily on consumer wel l-being and ensuring that there would be 
minimal disruption of service when a sale was completed  (UKAR 2019a). The organization 
also waived Early Repayment Charges (ERCs), opted to reimburse any customers that had 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: “To maximize value for the taxpayer and… 
to reduce costs by combining business 
infrastructure and sharing best practice in 
customer service” (UKAR 2012, 4) in winding down 
the closed mortgage books of B&B and Northern 
Rock Asset Management. 
Launch Dates  March 24, 2010 (Announced) 
October 1, 2010 (Operational  
and First Transfer) 
Wind-down Dates  Completed government 
ownership on February 26, 
2021 
Size and Type of 
NPL Problem 
5.59% of UKAR’s assets in 
arrears of 3+ months in 2010 
 
Residential mortgages and 
unsecured loans 
Program Size Not specified at outset 
Eligible 
Institutions 
Only B&B and Northern Rock 
eligible 
 
Closed-bank only 
Usage  Peak of £115.8 billion in 
assets 
Outcomes Completed government 
ownership of B&B and 
Northern Rock; profit of 
approx. £8.1 billion  
Ownership 
Structure 
Public-owned 
Notable Features Consumer-centered 
communication strategy; No 
new or current loans written 
or extended 
UK Asset Resolution Limited (UKAR) 
 
642
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
been falsely sold Payment Protection Insurance (PPI) by NRAM or B&B, and partnered with 
organizations in the debt help industry to assist troubled borrowers  (UKAR 2012) . As a 
whole, UKAR has managed to turn a profit of approximately £8.1 billion and reduce its 
balance sheet to £11.4 billion in assets . As of June 2019, the company also repaid all of its 
government loans (UKAR 2019b). UKAR sold the entirety of its remaining B&B and Northern 
Rock assets , including its equity stakes,  on February 26, 2021, thus ending government 
ownership of the two institutions (UKAR 2021b).  
Summary Evaluation 
Some of the company’s models and valuation techniques were criticized as being potentially 
sensitive to changes in the macroeconomic environment. The degree of judgment given to 
management as to how to structure these models was also challenged  (UKAR 2017b) . 
Despite there being minimal academic evaluation of UKAR, numerous independent audits 
have suggested that, overall, the asset management process has been efficient, with minimal 
issues (UKAR 2019b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
643
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 6 ---
UK Asset Resolution: UK Context 
GDP 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted to USD) 
$2.424 trillion in 2009 
$2.482 trillion in 2010 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted to USD) 
$38,713 in 2009 
$39,436 in 2010 
Sovereign credit rating (5-year senior debt) 
 
Data for 2009: 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
Fitch: AAA 
 
Data for 2010: 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
Fitch: AAA 
Size of banking system 
 
$4.730 trillion in 2009 
$4.635 trillion in 2010 
Size of banking system as a percentage of GDP 
 
195.15% in 2009 
186.72% in 2010 
Size of banking system as a percentage of financial 
system 
 
Data not available for 
2009 
Data not available for 
2010 
5-bank concentration of banking system 
 
75% in 2009 
76% in 2010 
Foreign involvement in banking system 15% in 2009 
15% in 2010 
Government ownership of banking system 
Data not available for 
2009 
Data not available for 
2010 
Existence of deposit insurance 
100% insurance on 
deposits up to $4,000; 
90% on next $66,000 in 
2007 
100% insurance on 
deposits up to $93,000 
after October 2008  
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; World Bank 
Deposit Insurance Dataset. 
 
 
 
644
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
Prior to the Global Financial Crisis, Northern Rock was the fifth largest mortgage lender in 
the UK (House of Commons 2009) . It was an institution that was heavily reliant on short -
term, wholesale funding and, because of this, acutely vulnerable to the stresses that the 
global financial system would sustain in 2007  (European Commission 2007) . As funding 
markets dried up, Northern Rock requested emergency assistance from the Bank of England. 
Upon hearing of this request, a huge run on retail deposits in September of 2007 would occur, 
with approximately £4.6 billion being withdrawn  (House of Comm ons 2009) . Despite 
receiving emergency support from the UK government, Northern Rock continued to issue 
“together” loans, containing a secured and unsecured element, which were tied to a single 
interest rate and monthly payment. These could be written at up to 125% of the property’s 
value (National Audit Office 2009) . In addition to writing these risky loans, Northern Rock 
also consistently understated its number of arrears.3 At first, a private buyer was sought out, 
but there were no banks that were both 1) willing to tackle the problematic Northern Rock 
balance sheet, and 2) able to raise the financing necessary to repay the £51 billion in  
emergency aid and guarantees that the Bank of England had provided  (House of Commons 
2009). This left the UK government little choice other than to nationalize the troubled lender 
on February 22, 2008  (European Commission 2008a) . By the end of 2009, a restructuring 
plan had been approved for Northern Rock, in which the troubled institution would be split 
in two. The “bad” bank, called Northern Rock Asset Management (NRAM), would contain the 
bulk of the institution’s mortgage book , a s well as any government loans and guarantees  
(UKAR 2010a; BBC News 2009). All other parts of Northern Rock’s business were  kept as a 
separate entity with the same name: Northern Rock plc. 
Throughout this same period, the bank Bradford & Bingley  (B&B) experienced sim ilar 
funding issues. Creditors such as TPG C apital pulled their investments after the lender 
experienced a ratings downgrade (Treanor 2008). As a result, the bank found itself not only 
incapable of raising enough funds to meet its obligations but forced to ask the government 
for emergency aid as its share price plummeted in September 2008 (European Commission 
2008b). Just as in the case of Northern Rock , the government searched for a willing buyer 
but, due to the continued stresses of the Global Financial Crisis, initially found none.  On 
September 29, 2008 a partial nationalization of the bank was finalized  (UKAR 2021a). Due 
to the state of its mortgage-related assets, lending balances, and non-savings businesses, the 
UK government opted to sell the bank’s deposits and branches to Sa ntander for 
approximately £600 million (BBC News 2008; CNN 2008).  
 
3 Northern Rock was required to curb the level of new lending activity as a requirement to receive aid from 
the Bank of England. However, over £750 million of additional Together mortgages were written in the 
period after they had received aid and before they were nationalized. Following their nationalization, 
Together products were completely removed from the market.  
645
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 8 ---
The task of managing both the “bad bank” portions of Northern Rock and Bradford & Bingley 
were eventually taken over by the newly-created UK Financial Investments Limited (UKFI) 
in November of 2008  (HM Treasury 2008b) . UKFI was a company that operated at a rm’s 
length from the government and was established during the financial crisis to manage the 
UK government’s holdings in key institutions . At the time of nationalization, there was no 
permanent resolution structure for insolvent financial institutions. Ho wever, the Banking 
Act 2009 formalized the Special Resolution Regime, which empowered the Bank of England 
as a resolution authority.  On October 1, 2010, after approval from the Financial Services 
Authority (FSA), UKFI was phased out as manager in favor of a new  holding company and 
subsidiary of UKFI, called UK Asset Resolution Limited (UKAR). Its purpose was  to wind 
down the closed mortgage books of B&B an d NRAM after the acute phase of the Global 
Financial Crisis had subsided (UKAR 2010b).  
Program Description 
UKAR was a state-owned holding company created to manage the closed mortgage portfolios 
of Bradford & Bingley and  Northern Rock Asset Management . The two mortgage lenders 
were separate subsidiaries  of the company and had been managed by UKFI subsequent to 
their respective nationalizations in 2008  (UKAR 2012). UKFI would retain a major role as 
the parent company of UKAR until April of 2018 (UKAR 2018a).  
UKAR’s primary objective, aside from an orderly wind -down of its balance sheet , was to 
maximize the return on this wind-down to the taxpayer. The corporation was funded by HM 
Treasury and the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) , which was t he UK’s 
deposit insurance institution. HM Treasury contributed £33 billion and the FSCS £15.7 
billion (UKAR 2012). At the time of its creation, UKAR held a total of £115.8 billion, consisting 
of hundreds of thousands of residential and commercial mortgages, and a smaller portion of 
mortgage-backed securities, derivatives, and unsecured  loans (UKAR 2019b) . A large 
amount of the corporation’s funding came from wholesale funding sources of B&B and NRAM 
(UKAR 2012).  
UKAR was only in charge of the portfolios of two failed lenders and, because these portfolios 
were closed, did not issue any new mortgages or write any new loans (UKAR 2013). UKAR’s 
function, then, was two -fold. It was required to not only manage and monitor th e 
performance of thousands of mortgages, but also to gradually dispose of and wind down the 
portfolios without adversely affecting real -estate markets  (UKAR 2010c; European 
Commission 2004). It was not allowed to write any new mortgages or to allow any of their 
customers to extend their mortgages past their original terms  (UKAR 2013) . Contracted 
employees that were hired and paid for by B&B staffed the organization (UKAR 2011a) . 
NRAM and UKAR had no direct employees. 
646
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1: UKAR Balance Sheet breakdown (as of December 31, 2010) 
Source: UKAR 2012. 
Most of these assets, as explained above, consisted of residential, commercial, or unsecured 
loans that had been made prior to the nationalization process. There were residual amounts 
of mortgage-related securities and derivative instruments, as well (UKAR 2019b). However, 
the bulk of UKAR’s assets were residential and commercial mortgages, thus, much of its time 
was spent servicing these loans and ensuring borrowers were able to meet their payments 
(UKAR 2014a). 
As of June 30, 2011, the total number of customers UKAR was servicing was approximately 
771,000. As such, the corporation partnered  with certain participants in the debt -help 
industry, waived early redemption charges, reimbursed customers for Payment Protection 
Insurance (PPI), and brokered several sales to outside institutions in efforts to better assist 
its customer base  (UKAR 2012; n.d.) . These strategies were all part of a broader 
communications effort by UKAR to ma ke consumers who might be under financial stress 
aware of the number of options available to them. 
By the end of December 2010, approximately 38,515 loans were in arrears or in the process 
of repossession. This fact prompted the UKAR to establish  relationships with Payplan, the 
Consumer Credit Counselling Service, Citizens Advice Bureau, the National Debt Line , and 
Money Advice Service, which were providers of free debt solutions (UKAR 2012). UKAR was 
extremely active in referring any customers with substantial debt to these nonprofit, charity-
based companies, such as PayPlan, who would then create a Debt Management Plan with the 
goal of reducing monthly payment stresses on the borrower (UKAR 2013). “Buy-to-let” loans 
were those sp ecifically made to landlords, who would then rent out, or “let ,” the property 
 
4 Investment securities also includes unsecured investment loans.  
5 “Other Assets” includes the following items: Other Assets, Current Tax Ass ets, Deferred Tax Assets, 
Retirement Benefit Assets, Investment Property, Property, Plant and Equipment, and Intangible Assets. 
 Amount (£ millions) 
Cash and Balances at Central Banks 7,291.8 
Loans and Advances to Banks 5,615.6 
Investment Securities4 3,924.6 
Loans and Advances to Customers 83,544.6 
Derivative Financial Instruments 9,471.6 
Fair value adjustments on portfolio 
hedging 
762.8 
Other Assets5 263.4 
Total 110,874.4 
647
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 10 ---
obtained by the loan to tenants  (Money Advice Service, n.d.) . If a buy -to-let loan was  in 
arrears, UKAR had a system in place that would allow it to directly collect rent from th e 
tenants so they would not have to leave in the event of repossession (UKAR 2014a). Though 
it did not happen frequently, UKAR was sometimes forced to engage in repossession efforts 
if a borrower was still unable to repay their loan, though this was only after all other options 
had been exhausted (UKAR 2013). 
Initially, early redemption charges (ERCs) were enforced at both B&B and NRAM (Bradford 
& Bingley 2010; UKAR 2011b) . ERCs were added to loans so lenders could protect 
themselves against early ref inancing or to recoup potential profits if interest rates fell. 
However, UKAR quickly realized that, in order to more rapidly wind down its balance sheet, 
it would be more beneficial to simply waive these charges. Additionally, many of UKAR’s 
customers wer e inappropriately sold PPI by their previous lenders. Rather than issue a 
blanket statement to honor all PPI obligations, false or otherwise, UKAR inform ed their 
customers that it would address any complaints and compensate customers if they felt they 
had been mis-sold PPI (UKAR 2012).  
Finally, the corporation engaged in multiple sales of various portfolios of mortgages and 
mortgage-related assets to private entities (UKAR, n.d.). These portfolios of assets were put 
up for large, multinational financial institutions such as Barclays and Citigroup to bid on 
(UKAR 2018c; 2019a). UKAR ultimately had the final say in who would become the owner of 
these assets, and in every case specifi ed that, “…there [would] be no changes to the terms 
and conditions of the loans as a result of the transaction.” Additionally, the company strongly 
advocated for “continuity of service” by selecting a winning bidder who would keep the same 
mortgage servicer (UKAR 2018b). This could not always be done, but in the majority of sales, 
the same servicer was able to be kept  (UKAR 2014b) . Equity-release mortgages, which 
involve the home being returned to the lender when the borrower dies or is put into long -
term care, were a small, but difficult-to-dispose of part of UKAR’s portfolio  (UKAR 2018c; 
The Guardian 2013) . No  Negative Equity Guarantees (NNEGs) had been placed on them, 
which made them hard to sell (UKAR 2018c).6 
 
6 NNEGs were standard guarantees placed on equity-release mortgages that capped the amount of a mortgage 
redemption at the lesser of the amount that the property sold for or the loan amount. If a property with an 
equity-release mortgage was sold at less than the face value of the loan and it had a NNEG, then the lender, or 
buyer of these mortgages, would only receive the amount the property sold for rather than the higher face 
value of the loan.  
648
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
Outcomes 
Figure 2: UKAR Government Loan Balance and Balance Sheet Assets (£ billions) 
 
Sources: UKAR Annual Reports 2011-18. 
UKAR’s disposition and management efforts were ongoing until February 2021 with 
substantial progress being made since its inception. UKFI, due to its function as a crisis-era 
organization, shut down on March 31, 2018, and had its management and administrative 
responsibilities transferred to UK Government Investments (UKGI). UKGI, which was 
created on April 1, 2016, was another government-owned company designed to be “The UK 
Government’s centre of excellence in corporate finance and corporate governance,” and to 
bring together the functions of a multitude of financial market-related institutions under 
the same umbrella. UKFI was made a subsidiary of UKGI shortly after its creation, but 
management duties of UKAR would remain with UKFI until its shutdown in March of 2018 
(UK Government Investments 2018). 
As of June 2019, the corporation’s balance sheet had been reduced to just £11.4 billion 
from its original size of £115.8 billion. These reduction efforts were largely due to loan 
redemptions, asset sales, and natural run-off (UKAR 2019b).  
Despite turbulent housing and financial markets during its early years, UKAR managed to 
turn a profit every year after 2010. Statutory profit peaked at £1.5 billion in the reporting 
period from December 2010 to December 2011, and reached its lowest point as of March 
31, 2019, at £0.3 billion. In total, the company has made approximately £8.1 billion as of 
June 2019. Key metrics, such as loans in arrears, number of repossessions, and overdue 
payments, continued to fall as well. The number of arrears peaked in 2010, with 39,532 
loans (UKAR 2019b). Repossessions would follow a similar trend, peaking in 2011, at 8,848 
(UKAR 2013). However, these would steadily decline as UKAR’s balance sheet shrank and it 
became more familiar with servicing these loans (UKAR 2019b).  
649
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 12 ---
As the company’s balance sheet wound down and the number of customers lessened, it 
began contracting out some key functions, such as mortgage servicing, to third-party firms. 
On May 4, 2016, UKAR announced a seven-year contract with mortgage servicer 
Computershare (UKAR 2016a). The contract, for about £30 billion in assets, officially began 
on June 6, and saw approximately 1,700 UKAR employees transfer to the organization to 
aid in the mortgage servicing process (UKAR 2016b). 
With its asset sale on April 2, 2019, UKAR announced its intent and ability to repay the 
remainder of the £30 billion government loan made by HM Treasury (UKAR 2019a). The 
£15.7 billion loan made by the FSCS was repaid about a year earlier, on April 26, 2018 
(UKAR 2018b). However, HM Treasury stated that, if UKAR required additional funding, it 
was willing to step in and provide it until the beginning of 2021. As of March 2019, UKAR 
still had about £11.4 billion in assets remaining on its balance sheet (UKAR 2019b).  
On February 26, 2021, UKAR announced the sale of its final assets from B&B and Northern 
Rock at a price of £5 billion to a consortium comprised of Citibank and Davidson Kempner 
Capital Management LP. This transaction consisted of two steps: UKAR sold the remaining 
loan portfolio to Citibank, and Davidson acquired the government’s equity in B&B and 
NRAM (UKAR 2021b). This concluded the government’s ownership of both institutions. 
UKAR will have no staff going forward but remains a government-owned entity, with 
PricewaterhouseCoopers handling any activities that arise. 
  
650
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a Package: UKAR was established in connection with the nationalizations 
of B&B and Northern Rock in order to manage their remaining “bad” assets. 
In the years leading up to the crisis, the composition of Northern Rock’s liabilities shifted 
away from retail deposits to wholesale funding, with over two -thirds of its funding coming 
from wholesale sources. This made the lender much more vulnerable to tightening credit 
conditions. Bradford and Bingley found itself unable to find affordable financing in the wake 
of several credit rating downgrades (European Commission 2008b). Both Northern Rock and 
B&B were unable to recoup the losses they sustained as a result of these continued pressures 
and were nationalized on February 22, 2008 , and September 29, 2008, respectively  
(Northern Rock Asset Mangement 2021; UKAR 2021a) . Authority for the nationalizations 
came from the Banking (Special Provisions) Act 2008 (UK Parliament 2008). 
NRAM was split from Northern Rock plc on January 1, 2010 , as part of a governmental 
restructuring effort (National Audit Office 2012) . It contained the corporation’s mortgage 
book and all of its unsecured loan accounts. As of July 2011, B&B and NRAM held 
approximately 771,000 mortgage loans (UKAR 2011a).7  
2. Legal Authority: The creation of UKAR received approval from the Financial 
Services Authority but did not require the same European Commission approval 
that the initial aid to Northern Rock and B&B did. 
Because NRAM and B&B had already been nationalized and gi ven state aid, t he creation of 
UKAR itself did not require approval from the European Commission, but the initial aid 
offered to Northern Rock and B&B did. The establishment of UKAR, however, required 
approval from the Financial Services Authority  (FSA), which was the two firms’ primary 
regulator. The organization  would be operated in accordance with st ate aid rules per EC 
guidelines, which are expanded upon below.8 
Ordinarily, state aid is considered “incompatible” with the common market per Article 87 of 
the Treaty of the European Commission. However, ad-hoc measures that constitute state aid 
are allowed under Article 87, section 3(b) if they are to “remedy a serious disturbance in the 
economy of a member state…”, so long as such aid does not  adversely affect trading 
conditions or the competitive environment of the common market (European Commission, 
n.d.).  
The European Commission ruled that t he initial aid offered to Northern Rock and B&B was 
permissible per Article 87(3)(b), despite the gov ernment of the UK not notifying the  
Commission prior to initiating it  (European Commission 2007; 2008b) . In its decision, the 
European Commission also cited its  Community Guidelines on State Aid for Rescuing and 
 
7 B&B services approximately 231,000, and NRAM approximately 540,000.  
8 See section 25 of the European Commission’s Community guidelines on State Aid for Rescuing and 
Restructuring Firms in Difficulty for more information. 
651
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 14 ---
Restructuring Firms in Difficulty as a primary tool to determine eligible state aid (European 
Commission 2007; 2008b). 
3. Special Powers: UKAR did not contain any notable special powers to pursue its 
mandate.  
UKAR did not possess any notable special powers to pursue its mandate.  
4. Mandate: UKAR was required to maximize value from asset disposition for the 
taxpayer, keep track of the effects of these disposition efforts, and promote 
healthy competition. 
In its framework agreement, UKAR’s overarching objective for disposing of its investments 
had three provisions: 
• maximizing sustainable value for the taxpayer while keeping risk in mind 
• monitoring the impact of disposal and restructuring transactions on financial stability  
• promoting healthy competition that “operates to the benefit of consumers and 
respects the commercial decisions of the financial institutions” (UKAR 2018a) 
5. Communication: UKAR released two financial statements a year with updated 
progress on its Key Performance Indicators and emphasized the importance of 
consumer-friendly policies in its communications about how it would manage and 
dispose of assets. 
UKAR released two financial statements a year, until transitioning to a single annual report 
in 2019. These financial statements included Key Performance Indicators which measured 
UKAR’s progress on its “Strategic priorities ,” which were “financial performance, run down 
the Balance Sheet, minimise impairment, [and] restructure and realign the business” (UKAR 
2011a).  
UKAR took strong consideration of the customers that would be affected by the sale of assets. 
In all of its press releases that referenced a specific sale, the company stated that the 
“continued fair treatment of customers” was a key consideration in selecting a buyer for their 
assets (UKAR 2019a; n.d.) . UKAR required its bidders to accept certain non -negotiable 
customer protections as a part of the process. MP John Glen explained that,  “For past sales, 
these protections required that: the servicer of the mortgages is regulated by the Financial 
Conduct Authority (FCA); the terms and conditions of the mortgages are not changed; and 
purchasers abide by restrictions on how the Standard Variable Rate (SVR) can be set” (House 
of Commons 2019).  
UKAR also referred struggling borrowers to a number of free debt advice providers, avenues 
that customers could contact if they were struggling to pay their mortgages  (UKAR 2014a). 
UKAR referred custome rs to third -party free debt advice companies such as Payplan, the 
Consumer Credit Counselling Service, Citizens Advice Bureau, National Debt Line , and the 
652
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
Money Advice Service  (UKAR 2012). These companies  would then work to create a Debt 
Management Plan with the goal of reducing monthly payment stresses on the borrower  
(UKAR 2013).  
Other, more minor initiatives, such as reimbursing customers for inappropriately sold 
Payment Protection Insurance (PPI) and waiving Early Redemption Charges (ERCs), were 
additional ways in which UKAR advocated for consumers (UKAR 2012). Payment Protection 
Insurance was something that a borrower could sign up for that would cover repayments if 
a borrower was unable to make them  (FCA, n.d.) . However, customers often bought PPI 
under false pretenses or were billed for it despite not knowing about it (Financial 
Ombudsman Service 2021). ERCs, which were commonplace  at both NRAM and B&B  prior 
to the crisis, were waived in the interest  of encouraging borrowers to repay their loans 
without penalty (UKAR, n.d.).  
6. Ownership Structure: UKAR was a state-owned holding company.  
UKAR was a state-owned holding company created to manage the closed mortgage portfolios 
of Bradford & Bingley and Northern Rock Asset Management. The two mortgage lenders 
were separate subsidiaries of the company and had been managed by UK Financial 
Investments (UKFI) subsequent to their respective nationalizations in 2008 (UKAR 2012). 
UKFI would retain a major role as the parent company and primary supervisor of UKAR until 
April of 2018 (UKAR 2018a).  
7. Governance/Administration: Initially, HM Treasury and UKFI oversaw the 
Corporation and shared a board of governors with NRAM and B&B , while the 
Financial Services Authority regulated NRAM and B&B as mortgage 
administration companies. 
Prior to March 31, 2018, UKFI, a crisis -era government corporation, was the primary 
manager and representative of HM Treasury’s 100% stake in UKAR. UKFI had a mandate to 
“develop and execute an orderly and active disposal of HM Treasury’s investments in 
financial institutions (including the UKAR subsidiaries) (UKAR 2017a). According to UKFI’s 
framework document, any Investee Company that was wholly owned, such as UKAR, acted 
“in a manner similar to that in which a financial sponsor would engage with a wholly-owned 
portfolio company”  (UK Financial Investments Ltd 2009).  UKFI acted on behalf of HM 
Treasury, and met with some of its members quarterly to discuss the implementation of 
UKFI’s investment strategies. 
Under the governance agreement, UKFI would conduct the following activities: 
• It appointed the Chairman of the Board of Directors and had the option to appoint 
additional Non-Executive directors. 
• It approved or disapproved the appointment of other members of the Board, and had 
to be consulted on any appointments. 
653
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 16 ---
• It analyzed the performance of and enforce d the objectives of the business plan that 
UKAR created. 
• It evaluated and approve d or decline d any potential transactions that met certain 
criteria (UKAR 2018a). 
Additionally, UKAR was required to regularly engage with UKFI (later UKGI) in monthly 
reviews about its performance, and to provide UKFI (later UKGI) with monthly “financial and 
business performance monitoring to assist this process.” Per its governance agreement, the 
company also was required to publish annual reports that would be given to the members 
of Parliament, who could request the Chairman and CEO of UKAR to attend any relevant 
meetings. 
UKAR, NRAM, and B&B all shared the same Board of Directors. The Board was made up of a 
variety of ex -Board members from NRAM and B&B, as well as other individuals that had 
spent a great deal of time in the financial services industry or in government (UKAR 2012). 
Staffing levels peaked at 2,424 as of December 31, 2012 , then d eclined over time (UKAR 
2014a). However, all the employees that were providing support for the two banks were 
contracted and paid for by B&B (UKAR 2011a). NRAM and UKAR had no direct employees. 
NRAM, per the Northern Rock Transfer Order 2009, had all its employees transferred to 
Northern Rock plc, thus ensuring that the B&B-contracted employees would work for one of 
the two nationalized lenders (UKAR 2012). 
Subsequent to March 31,  2018, UK Government Investments (UKGI) became UKAR ’s 
manager after UKFI shut down (UKAR 2018a) . No major changes to the governance 
framework occurred because of this switch.  
The Financial Services Authority (FSA) regulated both NRAM and B&B from a prudential 
standpoint, since they were considered mortgage administration compa nies. Initially, B&B 
functioned as a regulated bank, but applied in 2010 to change its status to a mortgage 
administration company, which the FSA approved in August 2010 (UKAR 2011a). After the 
FSA split up into the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and th e Prudential Regulation 
Authority, the FCA assumed the role of regulating mortgage administration companies 
(UKAR 2018c).  
8. Size: UKAR did not have a maximum size cap, but  did manage £115.8 billion in 
assets at its peak. 
At the time of the corporation’s inception, B&B and Northern Rock Asset Management had a 
combined £115.8 billion in assets that were transferred over to UKAR (UKAR 2018c).  
654
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
9. Funding Source: UKAR took over existing loans from HM Treasury and the 
Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) owed by B&B and NRAM, totaling 
£48.7 billion as of December 31, 2010. 
When UKAR took over B&B and NRAM, it acquired their liabilities as well as their asse ts. 
Those liabilities included £48.7 billion in debt to the UK government. As of June 2019, this 
amount has been repaid in full (UKAR 2019b).  
UKAR acquired a £21.7 billion loan, repayable on demand, from HM Treasury, originally 
made to NRAM. The interest on this loan was the Bank of England Base Rate plus 25 basis 
points. HM Treasury committed to continue funding NRAM until at least October 1, 2013, as 
well as convert £1.6 billion of its loan to NRAM to meet regulatory capital requirements if 
needed (UKAR 2012).  
UKAR took on £18.4 billion in interest -free statutory debt held by B&B, with £15.7 billion 
owed to the Financial Services Compensation Scheme and the remainder owed to HM 
Treasury. This statutory debt replaced B&B’s savings -related assets and liabilities, which 
were transferred to Banco Santander Group on September 29, 2009 (UKAR 2012).  
B&B additionally had an interest -bearing Working Ca pital Facility (WCF) provided by HM 
Treasury. Since August 1, 2011, the WCF charged a rate equal to the Bank Rate plus 500 basis 
points, an increase from the previous Bank Rate plus 150 basis points. B&B drew £8.4 billion 
in 2011 and £8.6 billion in 2012 from the WCF (UKAR 2012).  
UKAR stated that these loans would be paid off using the cash flows generated by NRAM and 
B&B during their wind-down. However, the timing of such repayments was not estimated in 
the 2011 Annual Report due to the uncertainty of the  redemption profiles of loans to 
customers (UKAR 2012). 
10. Eligible Institutions: UKAR took over the books of B &B and Northern Rock, and 
did not intervene into other institutions. 
During the early days of its lifespan, there was talk of potentially bringing parts of other 
financial institutions, such as the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), onto UKAR’s balance sheet 
(Thompson and Jenkins 2013) . However, this did not happen, and the bala nce sheet never 
increased beyond what was initially brought on board from the initial acquisition of B&B and 
NRAM (UKAR 2019b).  
11. Eligible Assets: There we re no eligibility constraints on the types of assets that 
UKAR managed. 
Residential property loans acc ounted for 9 5 percent of UKAR’s loans and advances as of 
December 30, 2010, shortly after UKAR took over the government’s stake in the companies  
(UKAR 2012). No new loans were made by UKAR since they took these two institutions over 
(UKAR 2013). Roughly 75% of t he assets that the company took were loans and advances. 
Other assets included mortgage-backed securities and related derivative products , which 
were primarily used for hedging purposes (UKAR 2019b).  
655
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 18 ---
Certain classes of assets, such as equity-release mortgages, were more difficult to sell due in 
no small part to the standard No Neg ative Equity Guarantees (NNEGs) . These guarantees, 
which were important for protecting borrowers, negatively affected the sale price of equity-
release portfolios (UKAR 2018d) . Additionally, tens of thousands of loans that UKAR 
acquired were in arrears or impaired in some way (UKAR 2012).  
12. Acquisition – Mechanics: NRAM and B&B became subsidiaries of UKAR on October 
1, 2010. 
B&B and NRAM were nationalized by HM Treasury on Septe mber 29, 2008 , and February 
22, 2008, respectively  (Northern Rock Asset Mangement 2021; UKAR 2021a) . Both the 
companies, as well as all of their remaining assets, were transferred under UKAR on October 
1, 2010 (UKAR 2010b). The one-time acquisition of the two nationalized institutions kept 
them as separate legal entities and allowed them to continue to operate individually despite 
being managed by UKAR (UKAR 2019b). The company was the sole shareholder of the two 
lenders, which were managed under a singular management structure and Board. 
13. Acquisition – Pricing: Since the UK government nationalized B&B and Northern 
Rock, there was no pricing of assets involved.  
The UK government nationalized B&B and Northern Rock rather than purchasing assets or 
conducting a recapitalization; therefore, there was no required pricing of assets in the 
operation. UKAR’s balance sheet reflected the book value of loans and advances, inclu ding 
any provisions for loan losses the closed companies had made prior to the transfer.  
14. Disposal: UKAR disposed of its assets through a variety of sales and redemptions. 
Asset sales followed a general process:  
• UKAR would analyze market conditions and determine whether it was appropriate 
to sell a selection of assets. 
• The company would then ensure that the potential sale would encourage enough 
competition amongst potential buyers that it would be reasonably compensated. 
• “Reasonable compen sation” was determined through a market -oriented valuation 
framework that included macroeconomic aggregates and potential cash  flows to 
determine what a fair price would be (UKAR 2019b). 
There were no restrictions on who was allowed to bid on the assets, although, in recent sales, 
UKAR would actively solicit bids from top “active” lenders, or institutions who were already 
engaged in lending. This was done because customers could, in theory, restructure or 
refinance with the new owner of the loan, if the owner was an active lender (UKAR 2019b). 
Transactions that met the following criteria required approval  from the supervising 
institution (initially UKFI, later UKGI): 
656
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
• transactions with proceeds of 250 million pounds or more 
• transactions with a net profit of 25 million pounds or more for UKAR or any of its 
subsidiaries 
• transactions which involved assets being sold at a discount or premium that is “not 
in line” with those in the market for similar assets or liabilities (UKAR 2018a) 
Borrowers repaying (redeeming) their loans also contributed to the gradual reduction in 
UKAR’s balance sheet (UKAR 2018c) . Redemption rates varied depending on the level of 
house prices and mortgage refinancing.  
As of March 2019, its £115.8 billion balance sheet has been reduced by £104.4 billion. 
Despite the types of assets UKAR had to manage, it managed to turn a profit every year since 
its inception. By June of 2019, UKAR had also paid off the entirety of the £48.7 billion in 
government loans, leaving approximately £11.4 billion on its balance sheet for disposal 
(UKAR 2019b). 
These significant advances allowed UKAR to position itself to sell off what remains of B&B 
and NRAM in their entirety within the next year. In its 2019 annual re port, the company 
stated that “We are now working with advisors in order to complete our objective of 
returning the UK taxpayers’ investment in NRAM and B&B to the private sector in full 
through the sale of the B&B and NRAM legal entities .” The company said that they believed 
they could broker a sale sometime during 2020, as they had already invited several potential 
bidders to tender as of April 2019 (UKAR 2019b).  
UKAR completed its disposition of B&B and Northern Rock assets on February 26, 2021, 
when it sold its remaining assets for £5 billion to a consortium comprised of Citibank and 
Davidson Kempner Capital Management LP (UKAR 2021b).  
15. Timeframe: UKAR never had a set sunset date, but finally sold its last assets in 
early 2021.  
Throughout its lifespan, the company avoided giving too many details on its wind -down 
procedures, but later communications indicated that its operations could cease as soon as 
2020. UKAR ended its ownership of B&B and Northern Rock on February 26, 2021, with the 
sale of its remaining assets. While UKAR will continue to exist as a government-owned entity, 
it will have no employees , and any required activities will be performed  by 
PricewaterhouseCoopers (UKAR 2021b). 
III. Evaluation 
UKAR has been subject to audits through its Audit Committee  since its inception and has 
published the results of these in the appropriate annual reports. Aside from these audits,  
there hasn’t  been much evaluation of the program due to the small number of lenders 
657
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 20 ---
involved and the relatively contained nature of the program. Several major accounting firms, 
such as Deloitte and PwC, as well as the National Audit Office (NAO), were involved in the 
auditing process (UKAR 2019b; 2017b).  
Loan-loss impairment. One of the most continually examined parts of the program had to 
do with the calculation of loan -loss impairments. The independent auditors took great care 
to zero in on these because, as mention ed in one of the reports, “…the Directors make 
complex and subjective judgments over both the timing of the recognition of impairments 
and the estimation of the extent of the impairment.. The construction of impairment models, 
then, often involved making assumptions that include the probability of default and changes 
in future home prices, among others  (UKAR 2014a). Some of these assumptions were not 
directly data-driven, either, such as one that adjusted for potential valuation fraud. Auditors 
would also c ompare the data produced by the UKAR’s models to those created by major 
industry players. While the models that were audited were seen as sufficient, one audit did 
mention that they were “…sensitive to the micro and macro -economic environment in the 
UK…” (UKAR 2017b). 
Customer Redress. UKAR had allocated a not inconsequential portion of its balance sheet to 
addressing redress claims (UKAR 2012). These were particularly noteworthy because many 
of their customers had been mis -sold PPI by B&B or NRAM and, as a result, were eligible to 
be reimbursed by the company.  Just as in the case of loan -loss impairments, the judgment 
required of UKAR’s management in estimating future redress payments was at the forefront 
of the independent auditing procedures (UKAR 2014a).  
Hedge Accounting. Initially, UKAR inherited a broad subset of derivative instruments from 
B&B and NRAM, adding some inherent volatility to its income statements. While these were 
almost exclusively used for hedging interest rate and foreign currency risk, the auditors took 
their time to carefully evaluate the models used to value these derivatives (UKAR 2015).  
There were other, minor concerns that the independent auditing teams identified, but none, 
including the three outlined above, suggested any significant risk. The audits were largely 
centered around challenging the degrees of independence that some of the management staff 
had when making estimations and valuations for models that had  an impact on UKAR’s 
financial statements (UKAR 2015). 
  
658
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
IV. References 
BBC News. 2008. “Spanish Bank Giant to Acquire B&B.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/spanish-bank-giant-acquire-bb. 
———. 2009. “Northern Rock Confirms Split Plan.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/northern-rock-confirms-split-plan. 
Bradford & Bingley. 2010. “Bradford & Bingley Plc Annual Report & Accounts 2009.” UKAR. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bradford-bingley-plc-annual-report-accounts-2009. 
CNN. 2008. “UK Lender Bradford & Bingley Nationalized.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-lender-bradford-bingley-nationalized. 
European Commission. 2004. “Community Guidelines on State Aid for Rescuing and 
Restructuring Firms in Difficulty.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/community-
guidelines-state-aid-rescuing-and-restructuring-firms-difficulty. 
———. 2007. “Rescue Aid to Northern Rock.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rescue-
aid-northern-rock. 
———. 2008a. “Restructuring Aid to Northern Rock.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/restructuring-aid-northern-rock. 
———. 2008b. “Rescue Aid to Bradford & Bingley.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rescue-aid-bradford-bingley. 
———. n.d. “Article 87 of the EC Treaty (Ex Article 92).” 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Article%2087%20of%20th
e%20EC%20Treaty%20(ex%20Article%2092).pdf. 
FCA. n.d. “Payment Protection Insurance Explained.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/payment-protection-insurance-explained. 
Financial Ombudsman Service. 2021. “PPI – Deadline Has Now Passed.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ppi-deadline-has-now-passed. 
HM Treasury. 2008a. “Ensuring Financial Stability for Bradford & Bingley Plc.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ensuring-financial-stability-bradford-bingley-plc. 
———. 2008b. “New Company to Manage Government’s Shareholding in Banks.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/new-company-manage-governments-shareholding-
banks. 
House of Commons. 2009. “The Nationalization of Northern Rock.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/nationalization-northern-rock. 
———. 2019. “UK Asset Resolution: Question for Treasury: UIN 226546, Tabled on 27 
February 2019.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-question-treasury-
uin-226546-tabled-27-february-2019. 
659
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 22 ---
Money Advice Service. n.d. “Buy-to-Let Mortgages Explained.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/buy-let-mortgages-explained. 
National Audit Office. 2009. “The Nationalisation of Northern Rock.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/nationalisation-northern-rock. 
———. 2012. “The Creation and Sale of Northern Rock Plc.” HM Treasury. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/creation-and-sale-northern-rock-plc. 
Northern Rock Asset Management. 2021. “Northern Rock Asset Management (NRAM): 
Overview.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/northern-rock-asset-management-nram-
overview. 
The Guardian. 2013. “Equity Release Schemes: How They Work.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/equity-release-schemes-how-they-work. 
Thompson, Jennifer, and Patrick Jenkins. 2013. “Osborne Puts Bad Bank Proposal Back on 
Drawing Board.” Financial Times. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/osborne-puts-bad-
bank-proposal-back-drawing-board. 
Treanor, Jill. 2008. “Bradford & Bingley Rights Issue: Banks Could Be Left with Large 
Stakes.” The Guardian. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bradford-bingley-rights-issue-
banks-could-be-left-large-stakes. 
UK Financial Investments Ltd. 2009. “Shareholder Relationship Framework Document 
Revised Version 13 July 2009.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/shareholder-
relationship-framework-document-revised-version-13-july-2009. 
UK Government Investments. 2018. “UK Government Investments Framework Document 
April 2018.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-government-investments-framework-
document-april-2018. 
UK Parliament. 2008. “Banking (Special Provisions) Act 2008.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banking-special-provisions-act-2008. 
UKAR. 2010a. “Northern Rock Renamed Northern Rock (Asset Management) Plc.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/northern-rock-renamed-northern-rock-asset-
management-plc. 
———. 2010b. “Establishment of UKAR.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/establishment-
ukar. 
———. 2010c. “Northern Rock (Asset Management) Plc Confirms Integration with 
Bradford & Bingley Plc under a New Holding Company.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/northern-rock-asset-management-plc-confirms-
integration-bradford-bingley-plc-under-new. 
———. 2011a. “UK Asset Resolution Limited Interim Financial Report for the 6 Months 
Ended 30 June 2011.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-
interim-financial-report-6-months-ended-30-june-2011. 
660
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
———. 2011b. “Half Year Results: UKAR Ltd Incorporating Bradford & Bingley Plc and 
Northern Rock (Asset Management) Plc.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/half-year-
results-ukar-ltd-incorporating-bradford-bingley-plc-and-northern-rock-asset. 
———. 2012. “UK Asset Resolution Limited Annual Report & Accounts 2011.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-annual-report-accounts-
2011. 
———. 2013. “UK Asset Resolution Limited Annual Report & Accounts 2012.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-annual-report-accounts-
2012. 
———. 2014a. “UK Asset Resolution Limited Annual Report & Accounts for the 15 Months 
to 31 March 2014.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-annual-
report-accounts-15-months-31-march-2014. 
———. 2014b. “UK Asset Resolution Successfully Concludes Sale Process for a Portfolio of 
Mortgages for £2.7bn.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-successfully-
concludes-sale-process-portfolio-mortgages-ps27bn. 
———. 2015. “UK Asset Resolution Limited Annual Report & Accounts for the 12 Months to 
31 March 2015.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-annual-
report-accounts-12-months-31-march-2015. 
———. 2016a. “UK Asset Resolution Announces the Transfer of Its Mortgage Servicing 
Operations to Computershare.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-
announces-transfer-its-mortgage-servicing-operations-computershare. 
———. 2016b. “UK Asset Resolution Confirms Mortgage Servicing Transferred to 
Computershare.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-confirms-
mortgage-servicing-transferred-computershare. 
———. 2017a. “UK Asset Resolution Limited and UK Financial Investments Limited: 
Relationship Framework Document.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-
resolution-limited-and-uk-financial-investments-limited-relationship-framework. 
———. 2017b. “UK Asset Resolution Limited Annual Report & Accounts for the 12 Months 
to 31 March 2017.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-annual-
report-accounts-12-months-31-march-2017. 
———. 2018a. “UK Asset Resolution Limited and UK Government Investments Limited: 
Relationship Framework Document.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-
resolution-limited-and-uk-government-investments-limited-relationship-framework. 
———. 2018b. “UK Asset Resolution Announces Sale of Bradford & Bingley Assets for 
£5.3bn, Enabling Full Repayment of the FSCS Loan.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-
asset-resolution-announces-sale-bradford-bingley-assets-ps53bn-enabling-full-repayment. 
661
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 24 ---
———. 2018c. “UK Asset Resolution Limited Annual Report & Accounts for the 12 Months 
to 31 March 2018.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-annual-
report-accounts-12-months-31-march-2018. 
———. 2018d. “UK Asset Resolution Announces Sale of a Portfolio of Equity Release 
Loans.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-announces-sale-portfolio-
equity-release-loans. 
———. 2019a. “UK Asset Resolution Announces £4.9bn Sale of NRAM Ltd Assets.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-announces-ps49bn-sale-nram-ltd-
assets. 
———. 2019b. “UK Asset Resolution Limited Annual Report & Accounts for the 12 Months 
to 31 March 2019.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-annual-
report-accounts-12-months-31-march-2019. 
———. 2021a. “Bradford and Bingley: Overview.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bradford-and-bingley-overview. 
———. 2021b. “UKAR Update.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ukar-update. 
———. n.d. “Press Releases.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/press-releases. 
———. n.d. “Redeeming Your Mortgage.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/redeeming-
your-mortgage. 
———. n.d. “UKAR: What We Do.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ukar-what-we-do. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
662
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
V. Key Program Documents 
Program Summary 
UK Asset Resolution Limited and UK Government Investments Limited: Relationship 
Framework Document (UK Asset Resolution 2018)  
Detailed overview of the governance arrangement between UKAR and UKGI, its new parent 
company. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/uk-asset-resolution-limited-and-uk-
government-investments-limited-relationship-framework. 
UKAR Internal Audit Terms of Reference (ToR) (UK Asset Resolution)  
Document laying out the specifics of the Terms of Reference to be used by the internal audit 
team of the UKAR. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ukar-internal-audit-terms-reference-
tor. 
Media Stories  
Bradford and Bingley rights issue: banks could be left with large stakes (The Guardian 
2008)  
Article that discusses the disappointing rights issue that B&B issued prior to their 
nationalization. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bradford-bingley-rights-issue-banks-
could-be-left-large-stakes. 
Spanish bank giant to acquire B&B (BBC News 2009)  
Article detailing the acquisition of B&B by the Spanish bank Santander. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/spanish-bank-giant-acquire-bb. 
Press Releases/Announcements 
UKAR Media Center: Press Releases (UK Asset Resolution)  
All relevant press releases here, dating back to before UKAR began. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/press-releases. 
New Company to manage Government’s shareholding in banks (HM Treasury 2008)  
Press release detailing the unveiling of UKFI and its role in managing government 
investments in NRAM and B&B. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/new-company-manage-
governments-shareholding-banks. 
Ensuring financial stability for Bradford & Bingley plc (HM Treasury)  
Press release detailing the nationalization of Bradford & Bingley. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ensuring-financial-stability-bradford-bingley-plc. 
Reports/Assessments 
The Nationalization of Northern Rock (House of Commons Public Accounts Committee 
2009)  
House of Commons report on the chronology of the nationalization of Northern Rock. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/nationalization-northern-rock. 
663
U.K. Asset Resolution Limited Lawson

--- Page 26 ---
Trapped Borrowers and UK Asset Resolution (House of Commons 2018)  
Report that described the phenomenon of “Trapped borrowers,” or borrowers who are unable 
to move their mortgages to another lender, as well as analysis on the UKAR’s performance. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/trapped-borrowers-and-uk-asset-resolution. 
 
Purchase of Distressed Assets by Cerberus (House of Commons 2017)  
Analysis of UKAR’s largest asset sale to Cerberus Capital Management. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/purchase-distressedassets-cerberus. 
 
Rescue Aid to Northern Rock (European Commission 2007)  
European Commission Case and decision on the UK government’s decision to provide Rescue 
Aid to Northern Rock. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rescue-aid-northern-rock. 
 
Rescue Aid to Bradford & Bingley (European Commission 2008)  
European Commission Case and decision on the UK government’s decision to provide Rescue 
Aid to B&B. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rescue-aid-bradford-bingley. 
 
Copyright 2021 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to 
receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program 
on Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
664
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2