--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 4 
2021 
Lessons Learned: Andreas Lehnert Lessons Learned: Andreas Lehnert 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, Macroeconomics Commons, and the 
Public Affairs, Public Policy and Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2021) "Lessons Learned: Andreas Lehnert," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 4, 
31-33. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1240 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss4/4 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss4/4

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Andreas Lehnert 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Andreas Lehnert was chief of the Federal Reserve’s Household and Real Estate Finance Section 
at the onset of the Global Financial Crisis of 2007 –09 (GFC) and played a key role in 
implementing the Fed’s research and policy agenda on financial stability. He developed and 
helped run the Fed’s first regulatory bank stress tests in 2009 , and in 2010 played a role in 
launching the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, which became the Division of 
Financial Stability. This “Lessons Learned” is based on an interview with Mr. Lehnert. 
Basic economic research has great value in a crisis. 
The financial ecosystem is complicated , and it pays to know how it will react to 
macroeconomic conditions in a crisis, says Lehne rt. “Now we call that macroprudential 
stress testing and there ’s a whole discipline around it, but boy, it sure would have been 
valuable to have had that 12–15 years ago,” he said. 
Understanding the drivers of decisions among households and businesses beco mes crucial 
at times when the macroeconomic factors are under stress, says Lehnert. But at the time of 
the GFC, there was little research on factors such as the stigma of foreclosure or how 
households would react to having negative equity in their homes. “ When the economy gets 
pushed away from its steady state, all the normal statistical relationships just go out the 
window,” said Lehnert. He elaborated further: 
There was a lot of confusion because all agencies were ultimately relying either on 
the same set of not very granular data that were available from commercial vendors, 
or the banks’ own reports of their exposures. There just wasn ’t, at least in the early 
days, an agreed-upon set of just basic facts. People would say, “This large bank holds 
zero subprime exposure.” Really? Zero subprime? You sort of dig into it and maybe 
(there’s) mortgages to borrowers with credit scores in the 500s but they have a 
relationship with these borrowers, they really believe in them , and they don’t think 
that they ’re really  subprime, you know? They just happen to have missed several 
payments on lots of different loans over the last few years. That is the kind of thing 
that can delay coordination and policymaking.  
Lehnert developed the first bank stress tests for the Fed in 2009. He described the 
experience as “touching a moving conveyor belt and getting dragged into the machine.” The 
initial stress -test attempts found the banks struggling with their own data and models, 
sometimes not even able to project the losses they were  already seeing on residential 
mortgages using their existing data and models. Lehnert recalled,  
One of the things that I worked on there was ultimately developing a very stripped -
down and simple model that projected defaults over a two -year planning hori zon 
based on just a handful of key risk indicators. Just fairly simply, having that kind of 
31

--- Page 4 ---
independent benchmark developed by the supervisor was incredibly useful. It really 
proved to be a very, very useful way to understand risks across banks. That was, in 
some sense, a key innovation that we built on into the CCAR [Comprehensive Capital 
and Analysis Review] Program. 
Strong and resilient banks are the core of the financial system. When their stability is 
threatened, stabilizing them must be a priority.  
The housing bubble was evident in real time as early as 2005, when the Fed’s June 2005 
Open Market Committee discussed it. But at the time, the feeling was that house prices 
would “rust, not bust,” noted Lehnert. There wasn’t a clear appreciation of the ris k posed 
by the residential mortgage market. “Subprime mortgages were seen as a potentially 
serious problem for the borrower, but not a systemic risk,” he said.  
The mortgage servicers were not set up to handle the volume of foreclosures and defaults 
that overwhelmed them in the crisis, having spent the previous years driving down costs 
and increasing volume. Using today’s macro tools, regulators would have put measures in 
place in 2003 –04 to avoid the mortgage bust, but by 2006 –07, it was too late for those  
macroprudential tools. Lehnert noted,  
The 2007 –2009 episode obviously is just incredibly salient. First and most 
important, we learned the importance of having strong and resilient banks at the 
center of the financial system. When you had banks and quasi -banks like Lehman 
that were fragile, that was a problem. The system was totally unable to cope with 
the credit losses from the house price decline. That’s ultimately why Congress had to 
pass TARP, why we needed to do the first stress test, the SCAP. I thi nk that lesson 
appears so far in 2020 to have paid off. 
The financial regulators should share information regularly before and during a 
crisis: don’t get caught scrambling to understand a crisis. 
The regulatory system works fine when times are normal. In normal operations 
interactions between agencies are channeled in very clear ways. Lehnert noted agencies 
are a bit like cou ntries: “They have their own distinct culture, in certain cases their own 
distinct language [and] conventions.” But, he stressed , in times of crisis, when bold, quick 
responses are necessary, agencies need to work together closely.  
Lehnert shared that it had been important in the fall of 2008 to learn quickly who his key 
contacts were at the F ederal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Treasury Department. He 
benefited from having worked with Sandra Braunstein and her team at the Fed Division of 
Consumer and Community Affairs (DCCA) starting in 2007. They were the staff dealing 
with borrowers and frontline staff dealing with the foreclosure wave.  
I think it was one of these emergency situations where it was just fantastic to have 
the channels of communication  open, to have those relationships in place. Then of 
course, when we transitioned into thinking more about mortgage modifications, this 
was a group of people that had a lot of experience with the issues around helping 
32
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
troubled borrowers. The Feds, predator y lending/subprime mortgages, all of that 
stuff was run out of DCCA. You would probably have to go talk to Alan Greenspan to 
find out exactly what people were thinking, but that group was just absolutely first -
rate when it came to actually managing the fallout of the crisis. 
Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) was one legacy of the GFC that targeted that 
compartmentalization that surfaced as a weakness during the crisis. Lehnert described it as 
a clearinghouse of information and a discussion forum where agencies can share their 
observations. Lehnert sees great value in its structure:  
It’s not an incredibly visible or high -profile part of the FSOC ’s mission , but if you 
wind back the clock 12 years, if the Lehnert of 2006 –2007 had been plugged into a n 
FSOC process, that guy would have known his counterparts at all the other relevant 
agencies. They would have hashed through all the data limitations that they were 
dealing with, and we would have overcome a lot of the initial friction. 
I can say during the current pandemic the FSOC’s key staff group, which is called the 
Systemic Risk Committee , has been meeting every week since the current crisis 
began. It is a really important forum for information sharing and real -time analysis. 
It doesn’t quite have the same headline-grabbing appeal, but from my perspective as 
a foot soldier in the last crisis, it would have been great to have had something like 
this in place back then. 
Lehnert joined Nellie Liang in launching the Fed’s Office of Financial Stability Pol icy and 
Research, another vehicle to share intelligence . The office later became the Division of 
Financial Stability. He was named director when Liang retired from the position in 2016. 
He reflected on the office: 
That was, I think, the guiding spirit behi nd several innovations, most importantly 
my division at the Fed. The idea was , look, let ’s build on the strengths that were 
demonstrated during the financial crisis so that we don’t have to, on the fly, reinvent 
the processes, to organize data analysis, people, to address financial stability issues. 
Nellie Liang and I left our division in November of 2010 to form a little group that 
was supposed to act as a kind of clearinghouse and coordinating function. We ’ve 
evolved over the years, but we continue to essentially be, in part, a kind of cultural 
exchange program. We bring in people from all over the Federal Reserve, from all 
different parts of the Federal Reserve, to work jointly on a kind of financial stabil ity 
assessment project. And of course,  now that we ’ve moved into more crisis 
management mode, obviously for that as well. I think that has been a key difference. 
Dated: December 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-43 
33
Lessons Learned: Andreas Lehnert Cardona