--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 2 
2021 
Lessons Learned: James Wigand Lessons Learned: James Wigand 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2021) "Lessons Learned: James Wigand," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 2, 
784-786. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1159 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/36 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss2/36

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability  
Lessons Learned 
 
James Wigand 
 
By Sandra Ward 
 
A finance specialist and longtime F ederal Deposit Insurance Corporation (F DIC) executive, 
James Wigand served as Deputy Director, Franchise and Asset Marketing, at the FDIC from 
1997 to 2010, a period encompassing the global financial crisis of 2007 -09. Wigand oversaw 
the resolution of all insured-depository institutions during the crisis, arranging acquisitions of 
troubled banks or liquidating them. He also acted as liaison between the chairman and board 
of directors of the FDIC.  In 2010, in the aftermath of the crisis, Wigand was named director of 
the newly created Office of Comple x Financial Institutions at the FDIC, an office formed under 
the Dodd-Frank Act, and also served as senior advisor to the agency’s chairman.  This Lessons 
Learned is based on an interview with Wigand. 
Actions send signals: Understanding market perceptions and the risk of contagion can 
help to avoid systemic risk. 
When Lehman Brothers failed in mid -September 2008 it sent a strong signal that the 
government’s approach to handling troubled institutions was changing, says Wigand. In 
earlier instances, the government had provided some sort of lifeline to flailing outfits: Bear 
Stearns, which received some aid from the New York Fed; Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, 
which were put under government conservatorship; and AIG, which received assistance, 
also. Yet, it took the collapse of Washington Mutual a few weeks after Lehman went bust for 
investors to realize there was no cookie -cutter approach and there  would be a limit to 
government assistance. Says Wigand, 
Washington Mutual’s failure reinforced the perception that there was a change in how 
the government was dealing with these distressed financial companies. A signal was 
sent that clearly reinforced the fact that the government was not going to be bailing 
out institutions just to bail them out.  
Investors reacted to the Washington Mutual case by revaluing assets at other banks, a 
process that quickly led to a reappraisal of Wachovia, whose loan portfolio resembled 
WaMu’s, and an outflow of deposits that ultim ately led to its acquisition by Wells Fargo. 
Wigand observes, 
Wachovia had purchased a thrift that had been located on the West Coast, and its 
footprint overlapped significantly with Washington Mutual ’s, so investors started 
thinking, ah, well, Wachovia looks an awful lot like Washington Mutual with respect 
to its single-family mortgage portfolio, so we ’re going to start having to think about 
the losses we are going to take on its unsecured debt. That, in turn, then cr eated a 
need to have Wachovia either be acquired, raise capital, or otherwise be resolved. By 
784

--- Page 4 ---
itself, it  really wasn ’t systemic, but it is illustrative of how a change in market 
perception can have an effect, particularly during a time of financial instabil ity. And 
it’s also illustrative of how market participants will look at an acquisition, in this case 
JPMorgan’s acquisition of Washington Mutual, and use that information as a basis to 
reprice similar asset books. 
Mind the gaps: The regulatory framework needs fixes to avert future calamity. 
As banks transformed themselves in the 1980s and ’90s into mega -financial enterprises 
offering a broad range of commercial, consumer, and investment banking services, 
circumventing the constraints established under the G lass-Steagall Act, the regulatory 
bodies overseeing them failed to keep pace with the changing nature of the business, notes 
Wigand.  
Advances in technology, the rise in nonbank institutions, the so -called “shadow” banking 
system, and financial intermediaries operating without banking charters, pose serious risks, 
then and now,  that need to be addressed, he says.  The time to tackle the cracks in the 
regulatory system is now. 
Observes Wigand,  
As the financial system continues to evolve, a gap may be in the works, and . . . there 
are now entities that are outside of regulation and that pose a risk to the financial 
system. 
The lesson learned by the gap in financial oversight that was created by n ot having 
authorities in place to deal with nonbank financial companies is it takes a long time 
to get something up and running. It may not be too premature to start thinking about 
how to deal with nonbank banks.  
Improved interagency communications: Addre ssing crises through coordinated 
action.  
Prior to the financial crisis, interagency communication among the various domestic 
regulators occurred occasionally but not regularly, says Wigand. Communication among 
global regulators was even more infrequent an d tended to be typically formal, meet -and-
greet sessions. That has changed for the better. Wigand notes, 
After the financial crisis, you had the creation of entities and bodies across regulatory 
agencies for the very purpose of communicating what one regulator was doing, and 
[how it was] looking at issues, hopefully in a way such that each regulator had an 
understanding of what the other regulator either was thinking or had to think about 
or the issues it was facing.  
785
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Knowing what those are, if you are another regulator, is very important, because it 
helps frame both your understanding of what that other regulator has to do and then 
also what you might be able to do to facilitate making progress on whatever that issue 
might be. 
On an international level, improved communication has resulted in a much better 
understanding of the authorities of the various regulatory bodies and of their missions, and 
interaction among global policymakers, says Wigand.  That allows for greater insights into 
how to best handle crises and coordinate responses in the event of a crisis. 
Wigand explains,  
Prior to the financial crisis, I had gone to the Bank of England once  with the chairman and 
the deputy to the chairman of the FDIC. It was basically a meet-and-greet visit. That was the 
only interaction I ever had with [officials at] the Bank of England. Then the financial crisi s 
hit, and afterwards I had multiple meetings with them per year. The huge benefit of that was 
a much better understanding of what authorities the Bank of England had and how a failure 
would be ostensibly treated in the normal course of events, understanding there are always 
exceptions. Also, I had a better understanding on where we could coordinate, though fully 
recognizing that each regulator had to abide by, and conform with, what its authorities were. 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: June 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-57 
 
 
786
Lessons Learned: James Wigand Ward