--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 2 
2021 
Lessons Learned: Michael Krimminger Lessons Learned: Michael Krimminger 
Charles Euchner 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, and the Macroeconomics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Euchner, Charles and Haggerty, Maryann (2021) "Lessons Learned: Michael Krimminger," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 2, 779-781. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1156 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/34 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss2/34

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
 
Michael Krimminger 
By Charles Euchner and Maryann Haggerty 
Michael Krimminger was Special Advisor for Policy and General Counsel at the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation during the global financial crisis. In that role, he provided legal and 
policy advice on the writing and implementation of the Dodd -Frank Act , including its 
systemically important financial institution provisions, living wills, capital markets and capital, 
and structured finance requirements. He is now a partner at Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton 
LLP. This “Lessons Learned” is based on an interview with Mr. Krimminger.  
Institutional roles matter: Statutory responsibilities affect how people approach 
crises. 
Too much emphasis has been placed on how personalities and personality conflicts played 
out in the global financial crisis, Krimminger sa ys. In his view, regulators and policymakers 
approached the crisis and its aftermath from the standpoint of legal obligations, some of 
which were in conflict in an unprecedented time. He points out, 
The FDIC is the supervisor for state and non -member banks and is the depositor 
insurer and the receiver for failed banks. So, it has a different role than does the Office 
of the Comptroller of the Currency or the Treasury. I think that ’s the predominant 
determinant of some of the conflicts that occurred.… The FDI C is doing this because 
that’s its job. The Treasury ’s doing this because that ’s its job. They ’re just different 
roles. 
One instance of this that Krim minger point s to is that Treasury and the FDIC brought 
different institutional perspectives to how the Dodd-Frank Act should treat troubled banks. 
He says, 
I think the people of Treasury would like to have more control over taking steps in a 
macroeconomic and a macrofinancial crisis than would the banking regulators. They 
wanted broad authority to provide support guarantees, loans, etc., in order to do 
bailouts as necessary. And the FDIC institutionally —and certainly Sheila Bair, the 
chairman at that time, personally —had long been convinced of the importance of 
imposing market discipline, and regula tory discipline if needs be, on financial 
institutions, so that they weren’t going to bailed out on a periodic basis. There was a 
rub there. So, in response to the proposals that came out of Treasury, internally and 
in discussions with Michael Barr [Treasu ry under-secretary in 2009 and 2010] and 
the Treasury, we came out fairly strongly against them because [those proposals] 
gave [Treasury] authority to provide the kind of bailout that the public and Congress 
had just railed against in the fall of 2008. 
779

--- Page 4 ---
Bailouts should be a last resort: They can encourage reckless behavior and risk a new 
crisis. 
Since the thrift and banking crises of the 1980s and early 1990s, the FDIC has dealt with 
problem banks using a power called “prompt corrective action,” Krimminger e xplains. To 
protect the deposit insurance fund, it can step in and “resolve” a troubled institution, often 
by closing it or selling it to another bank. Krimminger says that such a system provides more 
bank discipline than a system that makes an implied promise of bailouts. Under Dodd-Frank 
as it was eventually written, he sa ys, “The Treasury doesn ’t have the authority to provide 
unlimited loans and guarantees—which is a huge deal because that would lead to almost too 
easy a reliance on bailouts.” He explains further, 
There needs to be discipline. I see it as equally important for there to be discipline on 
the part of the regulators, so they don ’t just sweep things under the rug. You did not 
want to have market and regulatory discipline, and institutional and  banking 
discipline, [with] a perception that Treasury could just sweep in and provide 
guarantees. …  
You should strive to make the likelihood of a bailout very low even for the largest 
[institutions]—recognizing that there could be the unusual circumstanc e, like 2008 
or 1929, where you might have to do something beyond a resolution. 
The political issues that we have today are partly based on the public anger at the 
bailouts, so the negative consequences of a bailout can be much broader and much 
longer—much more immense now than they used to be. 
If you ’re doing [bailouts] with small banks or medium -sized banks or even the 
occasional large bank, most of the public doesn ’t really pay much attention. If you ’re 
doing it on a systemwide basis, like we had to do i n 2008, the public pays a lot more 
attention. I think that led to the Tea Party movement.  
There will be other crises: Prepare for them. 
Critics may say that post-mortems and plans on how to deal with future crises are useless—
that they’ll just “be put on a shelf,” Krimminger sa ys, and never consulted again. “But the 
value of the planning that went into the plan will make you better able to deal with the crisis 
than you would have if you hadn’t done the planning.” He continues, 
Everything I say and everybody else says will be forgotten by the time the next crisis 
comes around, whether that next crisis is in five years or 20 years. But if there ’s 
literature about things to think about, about concerns and issues and lessons learned 
… some people will look and say, “Well, they wrote about this and they came up with 
these ideas and said to think about these issues.” And hopefully it’ll have some impact. 
…  
That’s why I think planning is critical. And this is why I worry that we’ve already kind 
of declared victory and gone home in a lot of these areas, instead of continuing to plan 
780
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
and prepare. There ’s still some things going on, on an intergovernmental basis and 
certainly resolution planning of the banks going on. But, thinking through these issues 
is critical to keep going on and keep kind of thinking through how you would do this 
in real time with market changes and changes in business models, because you would 
then at least have some strategy for going forward.  
The process of planning creates value, he points out. For example, he says, under Dodd-Frank 
large banks are required to do resolution planning —that is, set out a plan for what would 
happen if they fail. Such a plan, known as a living will, requires mapping out the 
interconnections within what can  be a complex institution. Krimminger believes there is 
value to this: 
Operational connections in large financial institutions were very poorly understood, 
not only by the regulators, but by the banks, during the crisis and afterwards. The 
resolution planning processes require the banks to figure those things out. How are 
you going to ensure that the operations of your bank will continue? Who ’s providing 
the services? What kind of contracts do you have for these services? What kind of 
funding do you have to  make sure the services continue to flow? All of these things 
are important and are as important in a day-to-day business environment, right? In a 
crisis, they’re absolutely critical, but [banks have] even discovered that in the day-to-
day business environ ment, they can become more efficient by understanding those 
things and actually being more efficient about the way they do it. 
 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: June 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-05 
781
Lessons Learned: Michael Krimminger Euchner and Haggerty