--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 1 
2021 
Lessons Learned: Sarah Dahlgren Lessons Learned: Sarah Dahlgren 
Alec Buchholtz 
Yale School of Management 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Insurance Commons, Macroeconomics Commons, Other Political 
Science Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Buchholtz, Alec and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2021) "Lessons Learned: Sarah Dahlgren," Journal of Financial 
Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 1, 512-513. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1137 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss1/18 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss1/18

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
 
 
Sarah Dahlgren 
By Alec Buchholtz and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Sarah Dahlgren was the Executive Vice President and head of the Financial Institution 
Supervision Group at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) during the crisis and 
instrumental in the rescue of American International Group (AIG). This Lessons Learned 
summary is drawn from a March 22, 2018, interview in which she gave her take on how central 
bankers can prepare for future crises. 
Expect to negotiate: Big programs call for back-and-forth. 
The AIG rescue proceeded in multiple phases and eventually involved not only FRBNY, but 
also the Treasury Department. In November 2008, Treasury used funding from the Troubled 
Asset Relief Program (TARP) to inject $40 billion into AIG. The money went most ly to pay 
down an FRBNY lending facility. Determining that figure required negotiation. “I think the 
sets of conversations went like —‘If I could have gotten $50 billion, we would have gotten 
$50 billion,’” Dahlgren recalled. 
So, one of the lessons, at least for me, from the crisis is—the sets of conversations that 
you have to have with policymakers along the way, the first answer is always no. And 
so, you go back and redo your analysis , and you rethink and say, “Okay, I need to 
present to them two options.” And then the next answer is no.  
It’s a constant back-and-forth to make sure we get the right thing. I’m positive that we 
started with a higher number. And then it got to—“What can we reasonably do? What 
makes the most sense?” I think it really was a back -and-forth dialogue across all the 
principals saying, “What’s the right answer here? And what’s the right mix?”  
Were we comfortable with the risk? Nobody was happy with anything. But how do 
you coalesce around something that is the best package, with as m uch risk managed 
as you possibly can, and achieve your objectives? 
Complications can arise: Unexpected parties may have a stake. 
AIG Financial Products —the subsidiary that was the source of many of AIG’s problems —
relied on the parent company’s sterling credit rating to issue the credit default swaps (CDS) 
that eventually turned toxic. The rating agencies had a continuing interest in the status of the 
AIG bailout. Dahlgren said those companies “were not originally on my radar, but they turned 
out to be a pretty important component of the process.” She said, 
Within a week of my taking over the project, each of the major ratings agencies called 
me wanting to know all types of information. Because the agencies considered the 
government’s actions and intentions c ritical to the company’s health, it became 
essential that we address their concerns. 
Dahlgren’s team joined the AIG representatives when they met with the agencies. “We were 
in the room and responded to questions,” she said. “We were there because what the  Fed 
was thinking about doing was so central to what the rating agencies were concerned about.” 
512

--- Page 4 ---
Communication is key: The public demands information. 
The Federal Reserve System, including the FRBNY, long operated in relative anonymity. “We 
weren’t used to sharing information,” Dahlgren said. “We were a closed society.” The mindset 
was, “we do monetary policy, and nobody needs to know what that is,” she said. That changed 
with the financial crisis, when billions of dollars in public money propped up private 
companies. She recalled, 
The idea of communicating to the public and with Congress wasn’t on my radar until 
all of a sudden, there was enormous backlash. You’ve got enormous compensation 
issues and a whole bunch of things that we didn’t really anticipate. 
Dahlgren’s team turned to the FRBNY external communications office for support. The head 
of that office added a staffer dedicated to AIG to work directly with Dahlgren. She said, 
We were thinking through how do we communicate and provide press releases 
around big events. How do you make sure the media understands what we’re doing 
and why we’re doing it? I think that was really important, thinking through your 
communication strategy, to never assume that everybody understands the facts or 
reads everything. You really need to spend some time on your communication. 
There wasn’t a lot of concern going into the crisis that the Fed was lying to anybody. 
With a few exceptions, the Fed did its job, and nobody questioned its motives. We 
believed, “we’re the central bank and everybody must understand what we’re doing 
and why we’re doing it. ” We completely underestimated our level of support. The 
level of anger that then occurred as a result of all of the actions that the Fed took was 
a surprise. It didn’t occur to us that people would think that we were lying to them or 
that we were doing something nefarious. It was because we weren’t used to sharing 
information. 
 
_________________________ 
Dated: April 2021  
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-04 
 
 
513
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 1