--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 2 
2021 
The Thai Asset Management Company (TAMC) The Thai Asset Management Company (TAMC) 
Mallory Dreyer 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Dreyer, Mallory (2021) "The Thai Asset Management Company (TAMC)," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 
: Iss. 2, 512-545. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1181 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/25 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss2/25

--- Page 3 ---
The Thai Asset Management Company (TAMC)1 
 
Mallory Dreyer2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
June 23, 2021 
Abstract 
The combination of the collapse of a midsize bank due to fraud and the failure to meet 
projected exports exposed weakness in the Thai economy in 1996. Pressure on the baht grew 
in 1997, and the Thai government attempted to defend its currency by depleting foreign 
reserves. Thailand floated the baht in July 1997, which triggered a financial crisis. The 
government enco uraged financial institutions to establish institution-specific asset 
management companies to address nonperforming loans  (NPLs), which peaked in 1999 at 
47.7% of total loans. Despite those efforts, NPL  levels remained high. In 2001, the 
government created  the Thai Asset Management Company (TAMC)  to purchase and 
restructure NPLs. The focus was on reviving debtor companies to enable them to repay their 
debts. State-owned banks and state-led AMCs were required to transfer most of their NPLs 
to the TAMC; priva te banks and AMCs were required to transfer relatively large, multi -
creditor loans. The TAMC could restructure debt, reorganize businesses, and foreclose and 
dispose of property. Transferring institutions were jointly liable with the TAMC for the profit 
or loss on the management of the transferred assets; the TAMC had a predefined profit/loss-
sharing arrangement to be calculated at the fifth and 10th years of operations. The TAMC 
was required to cease operations in June 2011 and complete liquidation by June 2013. Over 
its 10-year lifespan, TAMC acquired assets with a book value of 780 billion baht 
(approximately $17.3 billion) for an approximate total purchase price of 265 billion baht.  
Keywords: Thailand, TAMC, asset management company, AMC, NPLs, debt restructuring
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale  Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering broad-based asset management company programs. 
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises  at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal -of-
financial-crises/. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
512

--- Page 4 ---
At a Glance  
Pressure on the Thai currency (the baht) grew in 
1996 and 1997 after the failure of a midsize bank 
exposed weaknesses in lending practices and 
export growth failed to meet projections. The 
Thai government attempted to defend its 
currency using reserves but  ultimately floated 
the baht on July 2, 1997, which led to a swift 
currency devaluation. In the immediate 
aftermath of the crisis, the  government adopted 
various measures, including encouraging state -
owned and private banks to establish ass et 
management companies (AMCs) . In the 2001 
election for prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra 
campaigned on a platform that included the 
establishment of a centralized AMC to address 
the nonperforming loan ( NPL) problem and aid 
economic recovery.  
The governmen t established t he TAMC by a 
royal decree in 2001 . State-owned institutions 
were required to transfer all assets classified as 
NPLs as of December 31, 2000; privately owned 
institutions were required to transfer relatively 
large, multi -creditor loans . In ge neral, the 
purchase price was equal to the underlying 
collateral value , excluding additional 
guarantees. The TAMC had special legal 
authority and immunity, and it utilized debt 
restructuring, business restructuring, and 
foreclosure and sale of collateral to manage and 
dispose of impaired assets. The transferring 
institution was jointly liable with the TAMC on 
profits or losses from the management of the transferred assets; the TAMC had a predefined 
profit/loss-sharing arrangement with transferring institutions that was calculated at the end 
of the fifth and 10th years. In total, 780 billion baht ( $17.3 billion) was transferred to the 
TAMC over its lifespan , for a purchase price of approximately 265 billion baht . The TAMC 
was required to cease operations in June 2011 and complete liquidation by June 2013.  
 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: The TAMC was established to 
manage “ non-performing loans to facilitate 
the continued business operations of honest 
debtors while solving the problems caused by 
impaired assets of the financial institutions ” 
(TAMC 2005c).  
Launch 
Dates 
Announcement: June 9, 2001  
Operational: October 2001 
First transfer: October 15, 2001  
Wind-
Down 
Dates 
Expiration date for transfers: 
Unclear  
Ceased operations: June 8, 2011  
Liquidated: June 2013 
Size and 
Type of 
NPL 
Problem 
Peak NPL ratio of 47.7% in 1999 
 
Corporate and real estate loans  
Program 
Size 
Expected to purchase up to 1.35 
trillion baht of NPLs  
Eligible 
Institutions 
Public and private financial 
institutions and public and 
private institution-specific AMCs 
Open-bank only  
Usage Acquired 780 billion baht ($17.3 
billion) (book value) for 
approximately 265 billion baht 
($5.9 billion) (transfer price)  
Outcomes Not disclosed 
Ownership 
Structure 
Government-owned 
Notable 
Features 
Profit/loss-sharing agreement 
with the transferring fina ncial 
institution; AMC included as part 
of political campaign  
The Thai Asset Management Company (TAMC) 
513
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Summary Evaluation 
The TAMC faced criticism for focusing on state-owned institutions and AMCs that were 
already restructuring NPL s. Others were concerned that the TAMC would delay the 
resolution of assets and called for more transparency about cash recoveries. While the TAMC 
provided information about the assets it purchased, it never disclosed information about the 
amount it ultimately recovered from liquidations and other resolution strategies. The World 
Bank reported in 2006 that cash recoveries to date had been only 2.5% of “resolved” cases. 
However, there were supporters of the TAMC. Two scholars concluded that the TAMC’s 
stricter approach to pricing assets and its profit/loss -sharing arrangement successfully 
reduced moral hazard behaviors in state -owned banks compared to the earlier regime, 
under which state-owned banks could transfer NPLs at “inflated prices” in order to improve 
their capital positions. Critics argue the TAMC was less successful with private banks because 
it set excessively stringent conditions on the assets it could acquire from them. Other post -
crisis analysis suggests that TAMC contributed to the decline in NPLs in Thailand.  
 
  
514
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 6 ---
The Thai Asset Management Company (TAMC): Thailand Context 
GDP 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$126.4 billion in 2000 
$120.2 billion in 2001 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$2,008 in 2000 
$1,893 in 2001 
Sovereign credit rating (5-year senior debt) 
 
Data for Q4 2000: 
Moody’s: Baa1 
S&P: A- 
Fitch: BBB+  
 
Data for Q4 2001: 
Moody’s: Baa1 
S&P: A- 
Fitch: BBB+ 
Size of banking system 
 
$161.5 billion in 2000  
$135.5 billion in 2001 
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
GDP 
 
127.8% in 2000  
112.7% in 2001  
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
financial system 
100% in 2000 
100% in 2001 
5-bank concentration of banking system 
 
68.6% in 2000 
67.1% in 2001 
Foreign involvement in banking system 7% in 1991 and 2001 
Government ownership of banking system 31% in 1991 and 2001 
Existence of deposit insurance Temporary blanket guarantee of 
depositors starting in 1997 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; World Bank 
Deposit Insurance Dataset; Cull, Martinez Peria, and Verrier 2018.  
 
515
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
Leading up to 1997, Thailand experienced an extended period of strong growth . Between 
1980 and 1995 , average economic growth  was 8.2% per year ( BOT 1997a). However, 
warning sign s began to appear  in 1996 when the Bangkok Bank of Commerce (BBC) 
“collapsed under the weight of nonperforming property loans that amounted to nearly half 
of its US $7.2 billion of assets” after fraudulent activities were exposed (Leightner 1999). The 
Bank of Thailand (BOT) seized control of the BBC in May 1996 , and the authorities pursued 
legal action against the bank (BOT 1997a). The BOT governor resigned soon after the scandal 
(Pura 1997). At the same time, export growth, which had averaged 19 % per year between 
1990 and 1995, declined to zero (BOT 1997a). The combination of the BBC scandal and the 
contraction in exports led to foreign pressure on the baht.  
Short-term foreign capital inflows rose rapidly in the mid -1990s in response to market 
liberalization and relatively high domestic interest rates ( Leightner 1999). Those capital 
inflows helped spur 25 % annual growth in c ommercial bank lending between 1990 and 
1995, particularly for real estate projects (BOT 1997a). A property bubble ensued but began 
to show signs of weakening in 1996, when a major property developer was unable to meet a 
foreign debt payment (Devakula 2002b). On March 9, 1997, the Bank of Thailand established 
the Property Loan Management Organization (PLMO) to buy nonperforming property loans 
from financial institutions  (FIs) and work with debtors to restructure loan terms (BOT 
1997a; 1997b; Nabi and Shivakumar 2001). This organization was not considered successful 
and did not address the growing nonperforming loan  (NPL) problem (Kawai and Takayasu 
1999). Turmoil in the Thai economy continued . There was a  run by depositors of finance 
companies (FCs)3 in late April and early May ; in June, the Thai authorities suspended 4 the 
operations of 16 FCs (Sharma 2003; World Bank 2006). 
Thailand’s current account deficit grew  in early 1997  as pressure on the baht mounted  
(Leightner 1999 ). The International Monetary Fund ( IMF) recommended that the Thai 
government allow more exchange rate flexibility or devalue the baht.5 Officials disregarded 
the advice and attempted to contain the foreign exchange crisis . According to the World 
Bank, the  BOT “int ervened, massively and secretly, in the foreign exchange market to 
support the baht ,” but in doing so,  the BOT depleted its foreign exchange reserves (World 
Bank 2006). On July 2, Thailand floated the baht, and the value  dropped from 25 baht per 
dollar to 30.32 baht per dollar the same day (Nabi and Shivakumar 2001). The decline in the 
 
3 Finance companies (FCs) were nonbank financial institutions that raised funds through public issuances of 
promissory notes, negotiable certificates of deposit, and bills of exchange, and through loans and overdrafts 
from banks. Finance companies often engaged in riskier lending than commercial banks (Kawai and Takayasu 
1999), as their borrowers often had been turned down by banks (Leightner 1999).  
4 Suspensions differed from closure, as a suspension was temporary and the resumption of operations was 
contingent on an acceptable recapitalization plan. Closure was permanent and involved liquidation.  
5 Thailand had been under a pegged exchange rate regime since World War II ( BOT 2015). 
516
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 8 ---
value of the baht significantly impacted Thai corporations, especially those that borrowed 
“freely and imprudently” from abroad without hedging for currency risk (Devakula 2002b).  
On August 5, 1997, the BOT suspended an additional 42 FCs. After requesting assistance from 
the IMF, Thailand and the IMF  reached an agreement in August 1997  (World Bank 2006 ). 
The financing package was worth $17.2 billion (Nabi and Shivakumar 2001, 20). The package 
had three pillars: financial sector restructuring, fiscal policy, and monetary and exchange 
rate policy. Financial sector restructuring included deposit guarantees, conditional liquidity 
support, steps to minimize moral hazard, closure of insolvent financial institutions, and 
structural reform (Nabi and Shivakumar 2001).  
To manage the  58 suspended  FCs, the government established the Financial Sector 
Restructuring Authority (FRA) and the Asset Management Corporation (AMC). The 
suspended FCs were required to submit restructuring plans to the FRA by the end of 1997; 
the FRA approved rehabilitation plans for only two of the companies. The remaining 56 FCs 
were placed under the control and supervision of the FRA for liquidation and wind -down 
(BOT 2000a). These FCs represented approximately 14% of the assets in the financial sector 
(World Bank 2006 ). The FRA began auction ing the assets in February 1998. The AMC was 
tasked with the purchase, management, restructuring, or sale of assets from the failed FCs, 
and it was the “bidder of last resort” at the FRA auctions (BOT 2000a).6  
The government also established the Corporate Debt Restructuring Advisory Committee 
(CDRAC) in June 1998  to address the NPL problem by facilitating debt restructuring 
negotiations (BOT 2002). The CDRAC initially focused on the largest NPL borrowers (World 
Bank 2006). By the end of 2002, the CDRAC supported the restructuring of 2.8  trillion baht 
in NPLs (IMF 2004). In most cases, the CDRAC did not reduce the total debt owed by the 
borrower to the lender. Rather, CDRAC efforts typically involved “cosmetic restructuring” 
through methods  such as maturity extensions, grace periods, or reduced interest rates 
(World Bank 2006 ).7 As a result, an estimated 15 % of restructured loans became 
nonperforming again during the early years of the program (IMF 2000). 
The Thai government also encouraged private and public financial institutions to establish 
their own asset management companies to address the high volume of NPLs. Between 1998 
and 2002, four state -led AMCs were established for the transfer of nonperforming assets  
(NPAs) from five state -owned banks .8 In the private sector, 12 AMCs were established 
between 1998 and 2001 ; 10 of the AMCs ha d the purpose of purchasing NPLs  solely from 
their parent institutions while the other two AMCs could also purchase from other financial 
institutions. Because the loans transferred to a private bank’s AMC were still reflected on the 
 
6 At the end of the FRA’s operations, in 2002, the FRA had recovered 271 billion baht or 36% of the assets from 
the closed finance companies (BOT 2002).  
7 The CDRAC ceased operations on October 1, 2006; over the course of its operations, it addressed 11,655 cases 
for a total of 1.5 trillion baht in book value of restructured debt (BOT 2006).  
8 The five state -owned banks were Bangkok Bank of Commerce (BBC), United Overseas Bank (UOBR), Krung 
Thai Bank (KTB), Bangkok Metropolitan Bank (BMB), and Siam City Bank (SCIB). The four decentralized and 
state-owned AMCs were the Bangkok C ommercial Asset Management Company (BAM), Petchburi Asset 
Management Company (PAM), Sukumvit Asset Management Company (SAM), and Radhanasin AMC (Terada -
Hagiwara and Pasadilla 2004).  
517
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
bank’s consolidated financial statements, p rivate banks did not transfer a large portion of 
their NPLs to the AMCs (Terada-Hagiwara and Pasadilla 2004). As of 2003, only four of the 
private AMC s had  purchased NPLs exceeding 30,000 baht (Santiprabhob 2003 ; Terada-
Hagiwara and Pasadilla 2004 ). Despite the establishment of the decentralized AMCs , NPL 
growth continued through the first quarter of 1999. NPLs peak ed in May 1999, with 47.7 % 
of total loans classified as NPLs ( BOT 1999). The pace of debt restructuring slowed around 
the end of 2000, and the NPL ratio in Thailand remained high (Santiprabhob 2003). 
Program Description 
The Thai Asset Management Company (TAMC) was established in 2001  to resolve the 
ongoing NPL problem in Thailand (Royal Proclamation 2001).9 It had no relationship with 
the previously established Asset Management Corporation, which purchased impaired 
assets from the failed finance companies. The TAMC was a centralized AMC with the purpose 
of “managing non-performing loans to facilitate the continued business operations of honest 
debtors while solving the problems caused by impaired assets of the financial institutions .” 
Though there were previous efforts to resolve the NPL problem between 1997 and 2001, the 
NPL problem persisted, as 1.35 trillio n baht of NPLs remained, an amount equal to 176.8 % 
of loans from financial institutions (TAMC 2005b).10 The reentry of previously restructured 
NPLs contributed to the persistence of the high NPL ratio (TAMC 2005b; World Bank 2006).  
Leading up to the January 2001 election for prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra campaigned 
on a platform that included the establishment of a centralized, state -backed AMC.  The 
general public viewed the large quantity of NPLs as an impediment to economic growth . 
NPLs preven ted private financial institutions  from extending new credit, as these 
institutions had to focus on resolving NPLs instead of new business activity. In addition, debt 
restructuring prevented borrowers from engaging in new business or investing in new 
projects. Thus, “effective NPL resolution was deemed crucial for the economic recovery to 
take place, and therefore, became a major policy issue in the general election that took place 
in January 2001” (Santiprabhob 2003).  
The cabinet formally approved the plan to establish the TAMC on June 5, 2001 (Amorn 2001). 
The TAMC was established by the Royal Proclamation on Thai Asset Management Company 
B.E. 2544 (2001), which was enacted by King Bhumibol Adulyadej per the recommendation 
of the cabinet. The rationale for using  a royal decree —which is similar to an executive 
order—to establish the TAMC was to expedite its establishment to prevent further economic 
damage or instability (Royal Proclamation  2001).11 When the program was announced, 
government officials reported that they expected the TAMC to buy up to 1.35 trillion baht of 
 
9 Translation of the royal decree provided by Cynthia Pornavalai. The dec ree was translated by the Bangkok 
Business and Secretarial Office. All references to the decree are references to the English language translation.  
10 The exchange rate in Thailand in 2001 was approximately 45 baht per $1 USD (Monetary Policy Group of the 
Bank of Thailand 2001, 2.14.1). 
11 In Thailand, an emergency decree or royal proclamation is a law that is enacted by the king upon the advice 
of the cabinet and subject to parliamentary approval as soon as possible.  
518
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 10 ---
nonperforming loans from banks , of which 1.1 trillion baht would come from st ate-owned 
banks (Amorn 2001).  
Operational concerns led to a revision of the process set forth in the royal decree for valuing 
the property collateral of assets transferred by private financial institutions and AMCs  
(Santiprabhob 2003). Under the royal decree, the TAMC would have valued land collateral 
based on the reference prices used by the Land Department in the calculation of land transfer 
fees (Pornavalai 2002). The government amended the decree in September to use valuation 
methods approved by the Bank of Thailand instead (Amendment 2001; Santiprabhob 2003). 
The amendment was established on  September 25, 2001  (Amendment 2001). The TAMC 
accepted the first tranche of assets on October 15, 2001 (TAMC 2001a).  
The TAMC had five missions: (1) rapid, transparent, and efficient management of impaired 
assets; (2) management of impaired assets in a manner that brought maximum public 
benefit; (3) minimization of government and taxpayer  losses; (4) facilitation of business 
rehabilitation to enable borrowers to continue business; and (5) equal and fair treatment to 
all parties in the management of assets (TAMC 2005c).  
The TAMC ’s initial funding was from the Financial Institution Development Fund (FIDF) 
(Pornavalai 2002). The FIDF, a subsidiary of the BOT, had the authority to provide assistance 
to troubled financial institutions through liquidity injections, the purchase of capital shares, 
and the guarantee ing of deposits ( BOT 2000b ).12 The TAMC issued 10-year bonds  to the 
selling institutions in exchange for assets; these bonds were nontransferable and guaranteed 
by the FIDF  (Santiprabhob 2003). The initial capital for the TAMC was 1 billion baht, and 
capital increases were allowed after approval from the cabinet (Royal Proclamation 2001). 
The Ministry of Finance (MOF) had direct oversight over the TAMC. The TAMC board of 
directors included government officials and industry representatives. It was responsible for 
setting the policies and for general supervision of the TAMC’s activities (TAMC 2005c). The 
TAMC also had an executive committee, which was responsible for overseeing t he 
management of impaired assets and approving  restructuring plans (Royal Proclamation 
2001; TAMC 2005c).  
State-owned financial institutions and AMCs were required to transfer all loans classified as 
substandard or below as of December 31, 2000 , to the TAMC. Private financial institutions 
and AMCs were required to transfer NPLs to the TAMC  for relatively large, multi -creditor 
loans (Royal Proclamation 2001). For the state-owned banks and AMCs, the purchase price 
was the value of the collateral e xcluding personal guarantees.  The TAMC board was 
responsible for determining the pricing methodology for assets without collateral . For 
private banks and AMCs, the purchase price was the lesser of either the value of the collateral 
excluding personal guarantees or the book value o f the NPLs less the applicable  reserves 
(Pornavalai 2002).  
 
12 The FIDF was established as an independent entity in 1985 (BOT 2000b). The FIDF was managed by the fund 
management committee, which comprised the BOT governor as the chairman, the secretary of the finance 
ministry as the deputy chairman, and nine committee members (BOT 2000b).  
519
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
The TAMC had explicit rules for profit and loss sharing with the transferring institution, as 
transferring institutions were jointly liable with the TAMC for profits or losses on the 
impaired assets transferred. At the end of the fifth and 10th years of operation, the TAMC 
calculated the profit or loss  on assets transferred by individual financial institutions, based 
on a predefined methodology in the royal decree (Royal Proclamation 2001). Profits for the 
transferring institution were capped at the difference between the boo k value and transfer 
price, and losses were capped at 30% of the transfer price (Terada-Hagiwara and Pasadilla 
2004). In the case of a loss, the transferring institution could offset its loss through the FIDF-
guaranteed bonds or by issuing ordinary shares to the TAMC (Royal Proclamation 2001).  
The TAMC had broad authority, as it had a “ flexible and powerful framework for the 
management and resolution of distressed loans ” (IMF 2001). To manage and dispose of its 
portfolio, the TAMC could restructure debt, coordinate business restructuring, or ultimately 
sell the underlying collateral . The TAMC established eligibility criteria for borrowers to be 
candidates for debt restructuring and bu siness restructuring, which emphasized business 
continuity and viability . If business restructuring or debt restructuring failed or if the 
borrower was deemed nonviable, the TAMC could utilize foreclosure and the sale of 
collateral assets as a “final resor t” (TAMC 2005c). Unlike those of other state agencies, the 
actions and decisions of the TAMC could not be challenged in court , and the TAMC staff had 
immunity against criminal liability (Santiprabhob 2003).  
The royal decree included provisions for the wind -down of the TAMC. After seven years of 
operations, the TAMC was required to begin planning to discontinue operations and 
liquidate. The royal decree specified that the TAMC was to cease operations 10 years after it 
was esta blished, in June 2011 . The TAMC was to complete liquidation by 2013  (Royal 
Proclamation 2001).  
Outcomes 
In 2001, there was some initial resistance to the establishment of the TAMC and its broad 
authority within the Thai legislature . A group of 100 senators petitioned the Constitutional 
Court, arguing that the TAMC was granted too much power to prevent debtors from 
appealing restructuring plans from the TAMC (Kazmin 2001) . In addition, there were 
concerns about the method for valuing collateral , which led to an amendment of the royal 
decree in September 2001 (Amendment 2001).  
The TAMC cleared “the constitutional hurdles” and began accepting asset transfers in 
October 2001 (Pornavalai 2002). The TAMC accepted its first transfer of impaired assets on 
October 15, 2001, a total of  264 billion baht in book value of assets from nine state-owned 
institutions (TAMC 2001a). In its first year of operations, the TAMC accepted three tranches 
of assets worth approximately 700 billion baht in book value (TAMC 2001c). After the first 
year of operations, the managing director of the TAMC was replaced, as the prime minister 
expressed disappointment with the performance of the TAMC (Tang 2002). 
520
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 12 ---
Over the course of its operations, approximately 780 billion baht in assets were transferred 
from financial institutions and AMCs to the TAMC (BOT 2003; 2006).13 The TAMC acquired 
most of its assets in the early months of its operations , with approximately 760 billion baht 
(of 780 billion baht) transferred by the end of 2002 (BOT 2002). The average transfer price 
was 34 % of book value as of December 2003; thus, the TAMC spent approximately 265 
billion baht to acquire 780 billion baht in book value of impaired assets (BOT 2003).14  
State-owned financial institutions and AMCs accounted for the majority of assets transferred 
to the TAMC. As of December 2003, 81 % of the book value of transferred assets came from 
state-owned institutions. Loans tied to the manufacturing or real estate se ctors accounted 
for more than 62% of the total book value of assets transferred to the TAMC (BOT 2003).  
To manage its portfolio of impaired assets , the TAMC first attempted debt restructuring or 
business restructuring. By 2004, approximately 69% of assets had been addressed via debt 
restructuring or business re structuring (BOT 2004). Installment payments, debt -to-equity 
conversions, and the transfer of assets to repay debt  were the most utilized methods. As of 
2003, the average haircut for debt restructuring was 38 % of book va lue. The expected 
recovery rate for debt restructuring and business restructuring cases was 47 %. In certain 
occasions, the TAMC outsourced the management of  loans to other banks or AMCs, such as 
Krung Thai Bank (KTB)  or Bangkok Commercial Asset Management Company (BAM), as 
these institutions “[had]  the nationwide networks and resources to manage [the] small 
debtors scattered throughout the country” (BOT 2003). 
In its last year of operations, the TAMC sought to accelerate the disposal of assets. Though 
the agency’s president, Churairat Panyarachun, said that the last year of operations would 
“be quite difficult, as the remaining assets [were] not that attractive,” the TAMC attempted 
to expedite the sale of remaining assets. The TAMC coordinated monthly auctions and road 
shows across Thailand to meet its sales target (Katharangsiporn 2010). In its final year, the 
TAMC launched a specia l price campaign (the “Last Price” campaign) to accelerate t he 
disposal of assets ( Chantanusornsiri 2011; Prachyakorn 2010). Between January and May 
2011, the TAMC sold 13  billion baht, compared to 19.5  billion baht in all of 2010 
(Katharangsiporn 2011). Additionally, the TAMC traveled to meet with debtors outside the 
Bangkok region to renegotiate debt repayment schedules or  interest rates to expedite debt 
repayment before the TAMC ceased operations (TAMC 2011). The TAMC ceased operations 
on June 8, 2011 (Katharangsiporn 2011). 
The royal decree establishing the TAMC required that the TAMC submit a liquidation plan to 
the cabinet in its seventh year of operations  (Royal Proclamation 2001). The TAMC 
presented its dissolution preparation plan to the Ministry of Finance in June 2008 and held 
 
13 The BOT did not disclose the TAMC’s activities  in its annual Supervision Report after 2006. Therefore, the 
estimates for the total assets transferred are based on the totals reported in 2003 (781 billion baht), 2004 (777 
billion baht), 2005 (777 billion baht), and 2006 (775 billion baht). See BOT Supervision Reports for the annual 
disclosures.  
14 The BOT did not disclose the total amount spent by the TAMC on the acquisition of assets, but the average 
transfer price was 34% of book value. Therefore, it can be estimated that the total amount spent on 780 billion 
baht in book value of assets was 265 billion baht (BOT 2003).  
521
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
meetings with 23 transferring institutions  regarding the profit- and loss -sharing 
arrangement (TAMC 2010 ). The original transferring in stitution had the first right to 
repurchase assets remaining on the TAMC’s balance sheet ; anything remaining was then 
purchased by the BAM or Sukhumvit Asset Management Company (SAM), two state -owned 
AMCs (TAMC 2010 ; USD C 2011). However, it does not appear that the MOF disclosed 
detailed information about the repurchase of assets by transferring institutions or other 
activities related to the liquidation of the TAMC.15  
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a Package: The TAMC was not a part of the government’s initial response 
to the financial crisis in 1997, as it  was established in 2001 as a measure to 
address the high remaining volume of NPLs that had not been resolved by 
decentralized AMCs and other interventions.  
The TAMC was established in 2001, four years after the onset of the financial crisis in 
Thailand (TAMC 2005b ). In 1997, the Thai government suspended the operations of 58 
finance companies and required them to submit rehabilitation plans by year’s end (Lindgren 
et al. 1999). Only two companies were allowed to continue operations; the remaining 56 FCs 
were liquidated by the Financial Sector Restructuring Authority  (BOT 2000 a). The state -
owned Asset Management Corporation was established to be the “bidder of last resort” for 
the FRA (BOT 2000a).  
The Thai government established the Corporate Debt Restructuring Advisory Committee in 
June 1998 to “facilitate and expedite private debt restructuring negotiations” (BOT 2002). In 
addition, the Thai govern ment committed public funds to recapitalize viable banks and 
finance companies by establishing two schemes to provide capital support to viable financial 
institutions (Lindgren et al. 1999). Amendments to the bankruptcy law were passed in April 
1998 and Ma y 1999 to further promote effective corporate restructuring (IMF 2000). In 
addition, the Thai government encouraged private and state-owned financial institutions to 
establish AMCs in the years following the crisis; overall, four state -owned AMCs and 12 
private AMCs were established (Terada-Hagiwara and Pasadilla 2004).  
The Thai authorities opted for the initial decentralized approach to resolving NPLs —
primarily through the establishment of individual AMCs and the CDRAC —because of 
concerns about operational difficulties and “potential political interference” in the 
operations of a centralized AMC.  But the decentralized approach was unsuccessful for a 
variety of reasons. Decentralized AMCs didn’t have the authority to bypass court procedures, 
limiting their ability to improve collections. Some s tate-bank AMCs overpaid for assets 
because the government’s goal was to recapitalize them. At the same time, private banks had 
 
15 According to BAM’s 2012 Annual Report, it purchased 135.4 billion baht in NPLs and NPAs from the TAMC 
in 2012, and 33.6% of its portfolio of distressed assets came from the TAMC by D ecember 2012 (BAM 2012; 
BAM 2013). Though SAM does not appear to have a public annual report, it reported an asset transfer worth 
352 billion baht from the TAMC in 2012; this transfer included 330 billion baht in NPLs and 22 billion baht in 
NPAs (Chudasri 2012). 
522
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 14 ---
little incentive to transfer NPLs to AMCs that they still had to consolidate . Under guidelines 
on the transfer of financial assets, a financial institution was required to hold capital against 
the NPLs and the AMC bonds used to purchase the bonds, which resulted in a “double 
counting of required capital” ( Santiprabhob 2003). By 2001, N PLs in the Thai financial 
system remained high at  1.35 trillion baht . T he government established the TAMC as a 
centralized AMC to replace the decentralized approach with a more aggressive strategy to 
address the persistence of the NPL problem (TAMC 2005b).  
2. Legal Authority: The Thai government established the TAMC via a royal decree in 
order to expedite its establishment.  
The Thai cabinet established the TAMC by the Royal Proclamation on Thai Asset 
Management Company B.E.2544 (2001), which was published in the Royal Thai Government 
Gazette. The king, Bhumibol Adulyadej, signed the decree into law, and the minister of 
finance was given “the charge and contr ol of the execution of the royal decree” (Royal 
Proclamation 2001). The decree  became effective on June 9, 2001 ( Amorn 2001 ; Royal 
Proclamation 2001; TAMC 2005b). The TAMC was established by a royal decree in order to 
expedite its establishment, as the dec ree allowed it to bypass debate and discussion in the 
parliament (Thai News Service  2001b). Prior to the passage of the royal decree, the prime 
minister convened a conference with representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the Bank 
of Thailand, state-owned and private institutions, and academics (TAMC 2005b). A working 
committee and four task forces were established after the conference in order to oversee and 
design the framework for the TAMC (Thai News Service  2001a). The task  forces included 
authorities from the Bank of Thailand, the Financial Institution Development Fund, the Thai 
Bankers’ Association  (representing commercial banks) , the Bank  of Asia  (a commercial 
bank), and the MOF . The taskforces were responsible for planning the general 
administration, asset management, debt repayment, and pricing frameworks (Thai News 
Service 2001a).  
3. Special Powers: The TAMC was granted special legal powe rs and immunity in its 
operations: staff were granted immunity from criminal liability; its decisions 
could not be challenged in court; it could place a debtor into permanent 
receivership if the debtor attempted to mislead or failed to comply with the TAMC; 
and it could make decisions without shareholder or creditor approval.  
The royal decree establishing the TAMC provided it with special legal authority and powers 
to achieve its objectives. The TAMC had “extraordinary powers to liquidate, restructure and 
dispose of assets” ( Kazmin 2001 ). The actions and decisions of the TAMC could not be 
challenged in the Central Administration Court. TAMC staff were granted immunity against 
criminal liability if they acted within the mandate of the royal decree. The TAMC could 
withdraw cases from the court and proceed with a different restructuring method. The TAMC 
could put debtors into permanent receivership without investigation if the debtor attempted 
to hide assets or failed to cooperate with the TAMC . The TAMC’s plans  for business 
restructuring could be approved by the Bankruptcy Court without the approval of debtors. 
The TAMC could make decisions in lieu of a company’s shareholders and could bypass 
procedures set forth in the public company law (Santiprabhob 2003).  
523
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
4. Mandates: The TAMC was establis hed to manage impaired assets, restructure 
debt, and assist with business reorganization.  
Despite the establishment of individual AMCs for state -owned and private financial 
institutions, NPL levels remained high at the end of 2001 (Santiprabhob 2003). The TAMC 
was established to address the high NPL ratio with the specific mandate to manage impaired 
assets from financial institutions and AMCs. Debt restructuring and business reorganization 
were further objectives of the TAMC  to advance the economic recovery in Thailand (Royal 
Proclamation 2001).  
Specifically, the  TAMC had five stated objectives : (1) rapid, transparent , and efficient 
management of impaired assets; (2) management of impaired assets in a manner that 
brought maximum public benefit; (3)  minimization of government and taxpayer losses; (4) 
facilitation of business rehabilitation to enable borrowers to continue business; and (5) 
equal and fair treatment to all parties in the management of assets (TAMC 2005c).  
5. Communications: The TAMC was a  key component of Prime Minister Thaksin 
Shinawatra’s electoral campaign and was framed as a necessary agency to 
addressing the NPL crisis to accelerate economic recovery. 
In the 2001 prime minister election, Thaksin Shinawatra ran on a platform that included the 
establishment of a centralized , state -backed asset management company (Government of 
Thailand 2001; Kazmin 2001 ; Santiprabhob 2003 ). The TAMC was considered  a key 
component of Shinawatra’s campaign and a contributing factor to his victory  (AFP 2001; 
Kazmin 2001). The electorate viewed the quantity of NPLs as an obstruction to economic 
growth as those loans  prevented new credit and business investment, delaying economic 
recovery in Thailand (Santiprabhob 2003). After taking office, Shinawatra ou tlined his key 
policy priorities , which included the establishment of a national AMC in order to 
“comprehensively solve the problem of Non -Performing Loans (NPLs) in the commercial 
banking system swiftly, systematically, [and] comprehensively and to enable  the financial 
system to resume their normal credit functions” (Government of Thailand 2001). The TAMC 
was framed as a “last chance” to resolve the NPL crisis in Thailand, as other measures had 
already been attempted (Pornavalai 2002).  
The BOT governor in 2001 stated that the TAMC would enable more effective management 
and disposal of distressed assets, though it had the potential to increase fiscal costs ; 
however, the costs would be “manageable” and “not abnormal in terms of international 
comparison” (Sonakul 2001). His successor  framed the TAMC as a body able to “deal 
effectively and speedily with the unresolved debts that involve [d] multiple creditors .” He 
stated that the TAMC had “vast executive powers” that allowed it “to take a comprehensive 
approach to debt restructuring and have the ability to deal with cases that might warrant 
corporate restructu ring and change of management” (Devakula 2001 ). In addition to 
statements from government officials, the TAMC prepared promotional materials in which it 
framed its operations as benefiting the Thai economy; these materials included a manual, 
which stated that the “TAMC provides real and tangible benefits to debtors, financial 
institutions, and asset management companies, [and] to Thai society and the overall national 
524
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 16 ---
economy.” The TAMC emphasized that its activities would allow  banks to return to normal 
lending practices, “providing the necessary engine for growth and national development as 
well as economic recovery” (TAMC 2005c).  
In addition to public statements from government officials and promotional materials , the 
TAMC issued press releases and announcements, annual reports , and other financial 
statements.  
6. Ownership Structure: The TAMC was  owned by the Financial Institution 
Development Fund, a separate legal entity that was part of the BOT.  
The TAMC was  fully owned by the Financial Institution Development Fund  (Pornavalai 
2002). The FIDF was established in 1985 as a subsidiary of the BOT “to rehabilitate financial 
institutions to maintain stability in the financial system” (BOT 2000 b). The FIDF purchased 
the initial 1 billion baht in share capital of the TAMC . The TAMC issued 10-year bonds that 
were used as consideration for the transfer of assets; these bonds were nontransferable and 
guaranteed by the FIDF . To increase capital, the TAMC could issue new shares, which 
required cabinet approval; any unsold shares were to be purchased by the FIDF ( Royal 
Proclamation 2001; Fung et al. 2004).  
7. Governance/Administration (1): The TAMC had a board of directors responsible 
for setting policies and an executive committee responsible for the processes 
related to the management of impaired assets ; the MOF had oversight authority 
over the TAMC.  
The minister of finance had the “charge and control of the execution” of the TAMC . The 
minister of finance was responsible for appointing up to 11 board members, who were 
approved by the cabinet. The board was required to have a representative from the Thai 
Bankers’ Association, the Chamber of Commerce, and the Federation of Thai Industries. The 
board set the policies, regulations, guidelines, and framework  for the TAMC (Royal 
Proclamation 2001). The board was required to review plans and provide recommendations 
and comments for cases with a book value of more than 1 billion baht, as “these cases [were] 
usually sensitive and [had] significant impact on the economy” (BOT 2002).  
The TAMC also had an executive committee, which was responsible for the management of 
impaired assets. The executive committee was composed of a CEO and three executive 
directors. The MOF, BOT, FIDF, Federation of Thai Industries, Chamber of Commerce, and 
private institutions nominated individual s to serve on the executive committee; the board 
appointed executive directors from the list of nominees. The board elected the managing 
director, who oversaw the administration of the TAMC . The executive committee reviewed 
and approved plans for debt rest ructuring, business reorganization , and asset sales . The 
executive committee monitored the TAMC’s progress , appointed and hired staff, secured 
capital sources and reorganization partners for the debtors, and reported the results of 
operations to the board (Royal Proclamation 2001). In 2002, the TAMC board approved an 
additional 130 staff roles, for a total of 330 staff ( TAMC 2002). At the end of its operations, 
the TAMC had 400 staff (Katharangsiporn 2011).  
525
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
8. Governance/Administration (2): The TAMC established risk management 
procedures and regular audits and posted information about its performance and 
auctions on its website.  
The minister of finance was able to “assign the Bank of Thailand to examine the business, the 
assets and the liabilities of the TAMC” (Royal Proclamation 2001). However, the BOT was not 
able to take supervisory action against the TAMC ( Fung et al.  2004). The TAMC followed 
accounting standards and established internal controls and an auditing system.  The TAMC 
was required to prepare financial statements every six months. The state auditor of Thailand 
was to audit the TAMC every six months and provide the results to the minister of finance 
(Royal Proclamation  2001). The TAMC was evaluated annually by an international 
accounting firm (Fung et al. 2004). In 2004, the TAMC board of directors established a risk 
management subcommittee to develop “a risk management system that [ could] identify, 
measure, control and monitor risks in accordance with corporate governance principles” 
(TAMC 2005a). 
The TAMC was required to act in a transparent way and ensure availability of its reports and 
progress (Royal Proclamation 2001). The TAMC had a website where annual reports, press 
releases, FAQs, and other resources were available; in addition, the website had a platform 
that allowed for the user to search for property (TAMC 2005b). Before an auction, the TAMC 
was required to post informatio n in the press and on its website . Despite these measures, 
analysis of the TAMC’s operations noted that the TAMC had not disclosed detailed 
information on its operations (Santiprabhob 2003).  
9. Size: There was no predefined size for the TAMC, though it was initially estimated 
that it would acquire 1.3 trillion baht of bad debt.  
The royal decree establishing the TAMC did not explicitly state a predefined size or limit to 
the TAMC’s purchasing (Royal Proclamation 2001). The initial expectation for the TAMC’s 
scope was 1.35 trillion baht of bad debt, with the majority coming from state -owned banks 
(Kazmin 2001; TAMC 2005b). In total, the TAMC acquired 780 billion baht) in assets at book 
value for a transfer price of approximately 265 billion baht.  
10. Funding Source: The TAMC r eceived its initial capital  of 1 billion baht  from the 
FIDF, which also guaranteed the bonds issued as consideration for transferred 
assets, but there was a  profit- and loss -sharing mechanism that limited the 
government’s exposure to losses.  
The FIDF provided the TAMC with initial capital of 1 billion baht (Santiprabhob 2003). In 
exchange for assets, the TAMC issued 10-year bonds that were  nontransferable and fully 
guaranteed by the FIDF. These bonds paid yearly interest at a rate no higher than the average 
interest rate paid by a selection of five large commercial banks ( Royal Proclamation 2001). 
Under the Royal Proclamation, there was also a detailed profit - and loss -sharing 
arrangement that shared the prospective losses and profits on the management and disposal 
of transferred assets with the transferring financial institution.  
526
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 18 ---
11. Eligible Institutions: Both private and state-owned financial institutions and asset 
management companies were eligible to transfer NPLs to the TAMC.  
Institutions eligible to transfer assets to the TAMC included financial institutions and asset 
management companies. Eligible financial institutions included commercial banks, finance 
companies (including those operating a securities business), credit foncier companies 
(mortgage loan companies), and others determined by the MOF. The private and state -
owned AMCs established after the financial crisis in 1997 were also eligible to transfer 
assets. Financial institutions or AMCs in which a state agency (i.e., FIDF) had more than 50% 
ownership were required to transfer all assets that were classified as substandard and below 
as of  December 31, 2000 , to the TAMC  (Royal Proclamation  2001). In 2002, the MOF 
announced that the Industrial Finance Corporation in Thailand was eligible to transfer assets 
(BOT 2002). Trade creditors and non -Thai banks were ineligible to transfer assets to the 
TAMC (Pornavalai 2002).  
12. Eligible Assets: State-owned financial institutions and AMCs were required to 
transfer all assets classified as substandard an d below as of December 31, 2000, 
to the TAMC. Privately owned financial institutions were required to transfer 
assets meeting a more stringent set of criteria. 
All state-owned financial institutions and AMCs were required to transfer all assets classified 
as impaired as of December 31, 2000, to the TAMC. The impaired assets included those that 
were classified as bad, possibly bad, doubtful or substandard (Royal Proclamation 2001). 
Substandard assets were those more than three months past due (Santiprabhob 2003).  
Private financial institutions and asset management companies were required to transfer 
NPLs to the TAMC if they met the following criteria: 
• The loans were secured by property;  
• The borrower was indebted to two or more Thai financial institutions; 
• The borrower had 5 million baht or more in NPLs;  
• The borrower and financial institution did not have a finalized debt restructuring 
agreement in writing by July 2001; and  
• The Bankruptcy Court had not approved a rehabilitation pl an (Pornavalai 2002 ; 
Royal Proclamation 2001; Santiprabhob 2003). 
Ineligible assets include d those related to the FRA’s activities or from companies the MOF 
suspended. Assets that became nonperforming after December 31, 2000 , were not eligible 
for transfer to the TAMC (TAMC 2005c). 
Institutions that did not transfer eligible assets to the TAMC faced a penalty (Royal 
Proclamation 2001; Santiprabhob 2003). If a financial institution failed to transfer the assets 
as directed by the TAMC, the institution was subject to a daily fine of 500,000 baht. 
Furthermore, private institutions that did not transfer assets were required by the Bank of 
Thailand to r eappraise the collateral backing NPLs within 120 days (Royal Proclamation  
2001). As an additional incentive to transfer, the institutions were required to provision for 
527
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
all loans classified as substandard and below 90 days after the appraisal up to their 
uncollateralized portion ; this provisioning was more stringent than the standard 
provisioning requirement by the BOT. Despite these penalties, by the end of 2001, the 
TAMC’s purchases of NPLs from private financial institutions comprised only 15% of their 
total outstanding NPLs (Santiprabhob 2003).  
13. Acquisition – Mechanics: To initiate a sale, the transferring institution submitted 
a request to the TAMC. Assets were sorted into tranches, based on the number of 
creditors, institution type, and amount of outstanding debt, and the TAMC issued 
FIDF-guaranteed bonds as consideration for the impaired assets.  
As a part of the process to transfer NPLs to the TAMC, an institution was required to provide 
written notice to the TAMC and complete  the transfer in the timeframe specified by the 
TAMC. Asset transfers were irrevocable. The TAMC was required to issue evidence of the 
transfer of the impaired assets to the transferring institution; the transfer was considered 
effective on the date the TA MC issued evidence to the transferring institution  (Royal 
Proclamation 2001).  
The TAMC issued FIDF-guaranteed bonds in exchange for the impaired assets. These bonds 
had a 10-year maturity and carried an interest rate that was no greater than the average 
interest rate paid by a select group of five large commercial banks. The interest on these 
bonds was paid yearly ( Royal Proclamation  2001). The BOT allowed the transferring 
institution to record these instruments “ as eligible liquid assets as of th e date of receipt of 
these notes” (BOT 2001).  
The TAMC accepted asset transfers in tranches (Fung et al. 2004). The TAMC announced that 
the first transfer of assets occurred on October 15, 2001; this tranche consisted of assets that 
had a borrower with at least 50 million baht in outstanding debt and with a state-owned 
institution as the single creditor ( TAMC 2001a ). The second tranche of assets was 
transferred on October 31, 2001, and included debt from borrowers with more than two 
creditors and assets fr om both state -owned and privately  owned financial institutions 
(TAMC 2001b ). The third tranche of assets was transferred on November 30, 2001, and  
included the rest of the assets with two or more creditors . The total book value of assets 
transferred at the end of the first year was approximately 700 billion baht ( TAMC 2001c). 
The majority of assets transferred to the TAMC were transferred in 2001 in  one of the first 
three tranches, and the TAMC had executed the transfer of five tranches of assets by 2003 
(Fung et al. 2004; TAMC 2001c).  
14. Acquisition – Pricing (1): The purchase price for assets  from state -owned 
institutions was equal to the collateral value, while the purchase price for assets 
from private institutions was the lesser of either the collateral value or the book 
value of the NPLs less the applicable reserves.  
For the purchase of assets from state-owned institutions, the purchase price was “equivalent 
to the value of assets that is the security of the said impaired assets, excluding personal 
guaranty. In case there is no property held as security, the price shall be according to the 
528
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 20 ---
bases laid down by the Board” (Royal Proclamation 2001). For the purchase of assets from 
private institutions, the purchase price was the lesser of either the collateral value excluding 
personal guarantees or the book value of the NPLs less applicable reserves. The book value 
was defined a s the “principal amount of the loan as at the date of transfer, together with 
accrued interest for the three -month period prior to the transfer date” (Pornavalai 2002). 
For the assets backed by real estate collateral, the pricing amendment enacted in September 
2001 required that the property valuation be in accordance with the methodology used by 
the Bank of Thailand (see the Key Design Decision No. 15, below) (Amendment 2001).  
At the time of a transfer, the TAMC provided an initial price estimate but evaluated the 
information accuracy to ensure proper pricing. The TAMC was required to notify the 
transferring institution that it accepted the transfer or of any amendments to pricing within 
180 days. At the end of 2001, the average transfer price for asse ts from private institutions 
was 53% of book value and 29% for state-owned institutions (TAMC 2001c).  
15. Acquisition – Pricing (2): The initial valuation method for real estate collateral 
was amended before the TAMC began operations.  
The government amended the valuation method for real estate collateral from private 
institutions in September 2001 and published the amendment in the Royal Thai Government 
Gazette. In the original version of the royal decree, the valuation for the land was equal to 
the price determined by the Land Department in its assessment for tax purposes. However, 
the Land Department did “not have the assessed price according to market price principle 
for all plots of land.” There was concern that submitting appraisal requests for the collateral 
property would add time to the transfer process, significantly delaying the timeframe of the 
TAMC and hindering economic recovery ( Amendment 2001). Furthermore, the original 
pricing principle “reflected the authorities’ limited knowledge about asset v aluation and on 
the capability of the Land Department” (Santiprabhob  2003). Thus, the pricing method for 
the purchase of assets from private institutions was amended to conform to the BOT’s 
standards (Amendment 2001).  
16. Acquisition – Pricing (3): The TAMC and the transferring financial institutions 
entered into profit - and loss-sharing agreements on the portfolio of transferred 
assets.  
The Royal Proclamation establishing the TAMC outlined the profit - and loss -sharing 
arrangement between the TAM C and the transferring institutions, specifying that the 
transferring institution and the TAMC would be jointly liable for the profits or losses on the 
management of transferred assets. The TAMC took operating expenses into account when 
calculating the profits or losses (Royal Proclamation 2001).  
In the case of a profit, the profit was allocated between the TAMC and the transferring 
institution as outlined in Figure 1 below.  
529
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 1. Distribution of profits between TAMC and transferring financial institutions 
 Amount of Profit Profit Distribution 
1 Equal to first 20% of transfer price or less  Equal sharing between TAMC (10%) and 
transferring institution (10%) 
2 Difference between book value and 
transfer price less the profit allocated to 
the transferring institution from (1)  
100% allocation to the transferring 
institution 
3 Any remaining profit 100% allocation to the TAMC 
Source: Royal Proclamation 2001. 
If there was a loss on the disposal of an asset, the loss was shared between the TAMC and the 
transferring financial institution as outlined in Figure 2 below.  
Figure 2. Distribution of losses between TAMC and transferring financial institutions 
 Amount of Loss Loss Distribution 
1 Equal to first 20% of transfer price or less  100% allocation to the transferring 
institution 
2 Equal to or less than the second 20% 
portion of the transfer price 
Equal sharing between TAMC and 
transferring institution 
3 Any remaining loss  100% allocation to the TAMC 
Source: Royal Proclamation 2001. 
Therefore, a transferring institution’s profits were capped at the difference between book 
value and transfer price, and its losses were capped at 30% of the t ransfer price. The TAMC 
and the transferring institutions calculated and recognized the profits on the management 
of assets at the end of the fifth and 10th years of the TAMC’s operations (Royal Proclamation 
2001).  
17. Management and Disposal (1): The TAMC ha d broad authority to use debt 
restructuring as a method to address the NPLs of viable borrowers.  
Debt restructuring was a primary tool for the TAMC to resolve its portfolio of impaired 
assets. The TAMC emphasized debt restructuring as a resolution method because “[t]he main 
objective of the process is to maintain the viability of the debtor’s business”  while still 
allowing the TAMC to recover “an appropriate amount of debt within a reasonable pe riod”. 
The TAMC had “broad authority to achieve its objective” in debt restructuring. Laws related 
to debt restructuring were waived for the T AMC. In order to be eligible for debt 
restructuring, the borrower had to be able to demonstrate the ability to rep ay, business 
viability, or benefit to the economic recovery of Thailand (TAMC 2005c).  
530
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 22 ---
The TAMC had the flexibility to determine the method or combination of methods based on 
the debtor’s circumstances and the complexity of the case (TAMC 2005c ). The methods 
available to the TAMC for debt restructuring included the following:  
• Reduction in principal, interest, interest rate, and time period for interest 
computation; 
• Extension of debt repayment period; 
• Debt-to-equity conversion; 
• Acceptance of the transfer of noncollateral assets (from the debtor or a third party) 
to settle a debt; 
• Debt repayment via a leaseback arrangement with the debtor; 
• Acceptance of shares or purchase of capital to increase shares of the debtor; 
• Release from or termination of the liability; or 
• Any other methods that the board approved  (Royal Proclamation 2001; TAMC 
2005c). 
The Royal Proclamation granted the TAMC additional special powers to release debtors from 
indebtedness. “If the debtor pledge[d] additional unencumbered assets with at least the 
same value as the outstanding debts, [the TAMC could] remove any remaining obligation 
from the debtor’s guarantor.” The TAMC could also release the debtors from their liability if 
the guarantor agreed to transfer assets with an appraised value of at least two -thirds of the 
value of the debtor’s total outstanding debts after the debt restructuring process  (TAMC 
2005c).  
The BOT reported that “[t]he installment payment method was utilized the most [by the 
TAMC] as it offered more flexibility to debtors. ” The TAMC also frequently utilized debt -to-
equity conversions and accepted the transfer of assets as a form of debt repayment. The 
average haircut for debt restructuring cases was 38% as of December 2003 (BOT 2003).  
18. Management and Disposal (2): The TAMC facilitated business restructuring for  
viable debtors to manage its portfolio of nonperforming loans. 
Business reorganization was a tool available to the TAMC to manage its portfolio of impaired 
assets. Business reorganization could improve a borrower’s viability through “more efficient 
management and a streamlining of its organization structure” (TAMC 2005c).  
In order to be eligib le for business reorganization, the borrower had to meet the following 
criteria:  
• The borrower was a  limited company, a public limited co mpany, or a juristic 
partnership; 
• The TAMC held at least 50% of the total outstanding debt of the borrower; 
• The borrower had preliminary evidence to support business continuation and 
viability; and 
531
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
• The borrower expressed written intent and consent to the  obligations and plan  
specified by the TAMC and the royal decree (Royal Proclamation 2001).  
The TAMC could facilitate business reorganization independently or in tandem with debt 
restructuring. The original creditors and asset managers were involved in the restructuring 
process (BOT 2002). The executive committee appointed a planner who beg an to arrange 
and organize a business reorganization plan for the borrower. The plan was required to 
include “ the particulars, methods and targets, pe riod of plan administration, and other 
details.” Business reorganization plans were limited to five years (Royal Proclamation 2001).  
The TAMC had broad powers to facilitate business reorganization  and could organize 
mergers, consolidations, dissolution of a part of the business, capital increases or reductions, 
rehabilitation by a third party, and change of management ( Royal Proclamation 2001; 
Santiprabhob 2003; TAMC 2005c). The TAMC could also enter into joint ventures and hold 
shares in companies, as long as the arrangement had both “clear objectives” and enabled the 
TAMC to “add value to and facilitate the management of assets for sale by TAMC” (TAMC 
2005c). If a business restructuring pl an continued to the end of its term, “the debtor and 
guarantor [would] be released from any remaining loan obligations” (Santiprabhob 2003).  
19. Management and Disposal (3): The TAMC had the authority to  foreclose on  
collateral for nonviable borrowers, but for viable borrowers, the TAMC first 
attempted debt restructuring or business restructuring.  
For viable debtors, the TAMC first attempted debt restructuring or business reorganization. 
However, if it was determined that the bo rrower was unable to repay the debt or that the 
borrower’s business was not sustainable, the TAMC was able to, “as a final resort ,” sell the 
assets. The TAMC had the authority to collect and enforce loans with property as collateral  
(TAMC 2005c).  
The TAMC  hired four independent asset managers to  support debtors whose cases were 
under foreclosure or final receivership. The TAMC managed assets received through 
foreclosure, final receivership, or debt repayment through the transfer of assets by adopting 
an asset-type-based strategy. For “complete and saleable projects,” the TAMC sold the assets 
through its website, public auctions, or in partnership with other institutions. For unfinished 
real estate projects with high potential, the projects were developed in cooperation with the 
private sector through joint ventures, property funds, or special purpose vehicles that 
enhanced the value of the property For low-income housing projects, the development was 
to be completed in coordination with governm ent agencies like the National Housing 
Authority (BOT 2003). 
In order to enforce the sale of collateral, t he TAMC was required to send  a notice to the 
borrower notifying them of the decision to enforce the debt and requiring  full repayment 
within one month (TAMC 2005c). The TAMC was required to inform  the borrower that the 
failure to repay allowed the TAMC to dispose of the property  (Royal Proclamation 2001). If 
the debt was not repaid, the TAMC then determine d the liquidation method . If the assets 
were to be transferred to the TAMC, the TAMC had an appraisal done on the property to 
532
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 24 ---
determine the amount to be credited against the borrower’s outstanding debt  (TAMC 
2005c). If the TAMC decided to proceed with the sale of the asset, t he TAMC organize d a 
public auction to sell the property; the TAMC was required to provide advance notice to the 
public regarding the auction. If the TAMC determined that an alternate m ethod “would be 
more beneficial to TAMC and the debtor, it [could] choose to dispose of the property by other 
method, or it [could] accept the transfer of the said property at a price not lower than the 
price receivable from the sale by public auction in  lieu of the disposal” (Royal Proclamation 
2001). 
20. Timeframe: The TAMC was  required to cease operating after 10 years and fully 
liquidate after 12 years.  
The decree that established the TAMC required it to be wound down 10 years after its 
establishment and fully liquidated 12 years after its establishment  (Royal Proclamation  
2001). Seven years after it began operations, the TAMC proposed a liquidation plan to the 
MOF and discussed profit - and loss -sharing arrangements with transferring financial 
institutions (TAMC 2010 ). A liquidation committee was appointed upon the decision to 
dissolve and liquidate the TAMC (Royal Proclamation 2001).  
To liquidate the remaining portfolio  of the TAMC, the original transferring institution had 
the first right to purchase the assets it transferred (USDC 2011). Any remaining assets were 
purchased by the Sukhumvit Asset Management Company or the Bangkok Commercial Asset 
Management Company (USDC 2011). SAM and BAM were two state-owned AMCs that were 
established in the aftermath of the 1997 financial crisis (Santiprabhob 2003).  BAM 
purchased 135.4 billion baht in impaired assets from the TAMC in 2012 (BAM 2012). In 2012, 
SAM reported asset transfers worth 330 billion baht in bad loans and 22 billion baht in NPAs 
from the TAMC (Chudasri 2012).  
III. Evaluation 
When the TAMC was established, there were a few vocal critics who raised concerns  in the 
press. The former finance minister, Tarrin Nimmanahaeminda, who “strongly opposed 
setting up a consolidated asset management company during his own tenure ,” argued that 
the TAMC would become “a house for an inventory of things to be kicked around”  (Kazmin 
2001). Some worried that the TAMC would be “a bailout for the rich at the expense of 
ordinary taxpayers” (Pura 1997 ). Others worried that the TAMC had “excessive and 
arbitrary” powers and were concerned that the borrowers did not have the ability to appeal 
the restructuring plans from th e TAMC. Another critique reported in press coverage at the 
time was the “worry that the TAMC [would] end up as a means for powerful debt defaulters 
to be restructured at public expense”  (Kazmin 2001). A senator was concerned that  “the 
‘rotten debts’ to be transferred to the TAMC would come mainly from companies run by 
people connected with incumbent politicians, including Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra” 
(Business Day  2001). An economist from the Standard Chartered Bank in Singapore was 
concerned that the TAMC would encourage Thai banks to “le nd largely irrespective of the 
533
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
credit-worthiness of the debtors,” meaning that the banks “might fall back on former habits” 
(Chen 2001).  
However, media coverage also included positive outlooks for the TAMC . The establishment 
of the TAMC “was applauded by the investment community, with brokers, fund managers 
and rating agencies all saying that the f ormation of the asset-management corporation may 
speed up the corporate debt restructuring and may provide the basis for a long -term 
recovery in ratings of Thai banks” ( Pandey 2001). The economic adviser to the prime 
minister claimed that the TAMC was “off to a good start” and that the TAMC had accepted 
more than half of the NPLs in the banking system as of 2002 (Khanna 2002.).  
During the first year of operations, t he TAMC was “under political pressure to restructure a 
large amount of NPLs in no time” as the TAMC set the goal to resolve 500 billion baht in loans 
by the end of 2002. Given the short timeframe to resolve a large volume of loans, some were 
concerned that the TAMC would “incur substantial public costs” and would unfairly benefit 
certain debtors (Santiprabhob 2003).  
The IMF evaluated the TAMC’s operations as of 2004 and found that the progress of the 
TAMC and its impact on the resolution of NPLs and economic recovery were unclear. The 
IMF team recognized that “the restructuring progress by the A MC has been impressive. Of 
the [ 761 billion  baht] transferred to the TAMC, resolution of [ 535 billion  baht] worth of 
assets (or 70% of total) have been approved by the Executive Committee.” However, the IMF 
team continued that “[t]he initi al picture of substantial progress is less clear once more 
detailed information about the resolution process is analyzed. Of the 795 debt restructuring 
cases, only 294 cases have been signed by the debtors, and almost two third s of the cases 
under this heading still have some way to go before a  final agreement can be reached .” The 
IMF team argued that “[i]n order to evaluate the progress of the TAMC, more information 
will have to be disclosed on a frequent basis .” The authors also evaluated the success of t he 
TAMC by examining the cash recoveries, which amounted “to around [8 billion baht] or 1.5% 
of the [535 billion baht] book value of all the ‘resolved’ cases” (IMF 2004). 
Another criticism of the  TAMC’s structure was its  inability to purchase more broadly from 
private institutions, which decreased its effectiveness in addressing the NPL problem. Of the 
NPLs transferred to the TAMC, approximately 81 % were from state -owned institutions, 
primarily SAM and PAM. The TAMC had p urchased a total of 137  billion baht from private 
institutions by the end of June  2002 (Santiprabhob 2003 . The “[s]tricter than expected 
conditions for private commercial banks to transfer their loans to the TAMC” prevented the 
TAMC from being effective at  addressing the bad loan problems in private banks ( Kazmin 
2001). The TAMC could not purchase NPLs with a previous court ruling or restructuring 
agreements; because the TAMC was set up four years after the onset of the crisis, “the 
majority of NPLs on the balance sheets of private FIs had either been restructured or 
achieved a court ruling,” which meant that the structure of the TAMC limited its effectiveness 
in addressing NPLs in private banks  (Santiprabhob 2003). In 2001, the IMF predicted that 
the TAMC would not have a significant impact on private banks, given that private banks had 
a “fairly small share of the total loans eligible for transfer” (IMF 2001). The governor of the 
BOT recognized that “a substantial share of distressed assets remain[ed] outside the purview 
534
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 26 ---
of the TAMC” and called for additional action to expedite debt restructuring through 
reformations to the bankruptcy law ( Devakula 2002a ). Furthermore, it was  argued that 
“[t]he lack of success with private banks is mainly due to the fact that the TAMC’s offer price 
is generally below what is acceptable to private banks” (Sharma 2003).  
Others worried that the T AMC prolonged NPL resolution , as it accepted assets from state -
owned AMCs that were already established and working to resolve the NPLs . Veerathai 
Santiprabhob, who later became governor of the BOT, argued that the “TAMC not only failed 
to assist private FIs in eliminating their NPL burden, but also contributed to the delay in the 
restructuring of NPLs that had already been transferred to PAM and SAM ” (2003). The 
resolution of NPLs from state -owned banks was fragment ed, as the establishment of the 
TAMC “severely disrupted” resolution procedures due to the uncertainty of the timeline and 
procedures surrounding the TAMC, which led to “further asset deterioration.” Santiprabhob 
also argued that the TAMC “increased FIs’ w orkload markedly, especially during the initial 
stage.”  
Another problem facing the TAMC was its staffing and reliance on the transferring financial 
institutions for addressing restructuring tasks. The TAMC had a limited staff composed of 
former BOT officials , which led to “severely limited” asset management cap abilities. 
Furthermore, the TAMC appointed the institution that had the largest loan outstanding to a 
debtor as the lead asset manager for that debtor, and they often relied on these lead asset 
managers for restructuring . The responsibilities of lead asset  managers were initially 
ambiguous and only agreed upon in March 2002. The TAMC also failed to sufficiently 
incentivize the lead asset managers to maximize the recovery o f assets. The TAMC was 
explicitly prohibited from paying fees or reimbursing private f inancial institutions for asset 
management activities. Therefore, for many of the lead asset managers, their only incentive 
was to minimize their expected loss es under the loss -sharing arrangement (Santiprabhob 
2003).  
The World Bank released a “Project Performance Assessment Report” in 2006 that evaluated 
the effectiveness of the loans made to Thailand in response to the 1997 financial crisis. In the 
evaluation, the World Bank authors expressed concern about the lack of transparency in the 
TAMC’s resolution operations, and specifically addressed “the need for more information 
about actual and projected cash recoveries from all  types of resolution procedures .” At the 
time of the evaluation, the TAMC had projected a 46.28 % recovery rate of the book value, 
but the cash recoveries had thus far been 2.5 % of the “resolved” cases. In order to decrease 
the burden transferred to the public, the World Bank called for “more careful monitoring” of 
cash flows (World Bank 2006).  
In a 2004 analysis of the experience of Asian AMCs, Akiko Terada -Hagiwara and Gloria 
Pasadilla evaluated the moral hazard effects of AMCs on the lending behavior of Thai banks. 
The authors evaluate d Thailand because it adopted various  AMC regimes, specifically 
decentralized privately  owned, decentralized state -owned, and centralized state -owned 
AMCs. They found that the effect of the TAMC was significant, implying that fewer NPLs were 
created under the TAMC as the economy improv ed. The authors conclude d that the TAMC 
“work[ed] to decrease the new NPL ratio, presumably due to better control measures 
535
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 27 ---
addressing potential moral hazard effects on banks” in comparison to the decentralized AMC 
structures (Terada-Hagiwara and Pasadilla 2004).  
In 2016, Masahiro Inoguchi from Ritsumeikan University evaluated the performance of the 
TAMC and estimated its effectiveness at reducing the number of NPLs in Thailand. He 
compared the effectiveness of Danaharta in Malaysia with the TAMC in Thailand and 
concluded that “selling loans to public asset management companies was effective in 
reducing NPL, especially in Thailand. ” The author found that the TAMC had a  significant 
negative effect on the number of NPLs and conclude s that “the purchase o f loans by TAMC 
may [have reduced] the NPL ratio of Thai commercial banks” because the  TAMC had a 
greater impact on the number of NPLs than on the total number of loans. Inoguchi recognized 
that the improvement in macroeconomic conditions also improved the NPL ratio in Thailand. 
Without the TAMC, “solving the NPL problem would have largely depended on the general 
improvement in macroeconomic conditions,” which implies that the macroeconomic policy 
“may have played an important role in resolving the NPL problem” (Inoguchi 2016).  
IV. References 
Act Amending Royal Proclamation on Thai Asset Management Company B.E. 2544  
(Amendment). 2001. Thai Ministerial Information Bulletin No. 9245. November 1, 2001.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/act-amending-royal-proclamation-thai-asset-
management-company-be-2544-2001. 
Agence France -Presse (AFP). 2001. “Thai Asset Management Company to Begin Debt 
Transfer in July.” June 25, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-begin-debt-transfer-
july.  
Amorn, Vithoon. 2001. “Thai Asset Management Company Plan Approved.” Reuters News. 
June 5, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-plan-approved. 
Bangkok Commercial Asset Management Company  (BAM). 2012. “Annual Report  2012.” 
December 31, 2012.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bam-annual-report-2012.  
———. 2013. “Annual Report 2013.” December 31, 2013. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bam-annual-report-2013 
Bank of Thailand (BOT). 1997a. “Supervision Report 1996/7.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-19967. 
———. 1997b. “Thai Authorities Take a Major S tep to Resolve Property Loan Problems.” 
Report No. 13/1997. March 11, 1997.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-authorities-take-major-step-resolve-property-loan-
problems. 
———. 1999. Annual Economic Report 1999. Bangkok: Bank of Thailand  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-economic-report-1999. 
536
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 28 ---
———. 2000a. “Supervision Report 2000.” Bangkok: Bank of Thailand.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2000. 
———. 2000b. “Announcement of FIDF’s History and Financial Position.” May 12, 2000.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/announcement-fidfs-history-and-financial-position. 
———. 2001. Annual Economic Report 2001. Bangkok: Bank of Thailand.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bot-annual-economic-report. 
———. 2002. “Supervision Report 2001-2002.” Bangkok: Bank of Thailand.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2002. 
———. 2003. “Supervision Report 2003.” Bangkok: Bank of Thailand.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2003. 
———. 2004. “Supervision Report 2004.” Bangkok: Bank of Thailand.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2004. 
———. 2006. “Supervision Report 2006.” Bangkok: Bank of Thailand.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2006. 
———. 2006. “Development of the Monetary Policy Framework in Thailand.” Bangkok: Bank 
of Thailand. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/development-monetary-policy-framework-
thailand.  
Business Day. 2001. “TAMC Must Not Be Used as a Tool for the Politically Connected.” October 
4, 2001.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-must-not-be-used-tool-politically-connected. 
Chantanusornsiri, Wichit (2011). “Everything Must Go.” Bangkok Post , January 26, 2011.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/everything-must-go 
Chen, Jennifer. 2001. “Southeast Asia Spends Today, Worries Tomorrow.” Reuters News , 
August 3, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/southeast-asia-spends-today-worries-tomorrow. 
Chudasri, Darana. 2012. “SAM Allots B3bn for Dud Finances.” Bangkok Post, April 6, 2012.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/clone-southeast-asia-spends-today-worries-tomorrow. 
Cull, Robert, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Jeanne Verrier. 2018. “Bank Ownership: 
Trends and Implications.”  World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 8297, January 
2018. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-ownership-trends-and-implications. 
Devakula, Pridiyathorn. 2001. “Monetary Policy in Thailand: Current Challenges and 
Prospects.” Speech delivered at the 2001 Asia Pacific Finance Association annual conference, 
Bangkok, July 24, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/monetary-policy-thailand-current-challenges-and-
prospects. 
———. 2002a. “Outlook for 2002 and the Road Ahead.” Speech delivered to the Foreign 
Banks Association, Bangkok, March 6, 2002.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/outlook-2002-and-road-ahead. 
537
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 29 ---
———. 2002b. “Thailand’s Emergence from the Crisis – New Paradigm for Sustainable 
Growth.” Speech delivered at the International Conference on Economic Recovery and 
Reforms, Bangkok, October 28, 2002.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailands-emergence-crisis-new-paradigm-sustainable-
growth. 
Fung, B en, Jason George, Stefan Hohl, and Guonan Ma. 2004. “Public Asset Management 
Companies in East Asia: A Comparative Study.” Bank for International Settlements, Financial 
Stability Institute Occasional Paper No. 3, February 2004.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-asset-management-companies-east-asia. 
Government of Thailand. 2001. “Policy of the Government of H.E. Prime Minister Thak sin 
Shinawatra.” Speech delivered to the National Assembly, Bangkok, February 26, 2001.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/policy-government-he-prime-minister-thaksin-
shinawatra-delivered-national-assembly-monday. 
Inoguchi, Masahiro. 2016. “Nonperforming L oans and Purchase of Loans by Public Asset 
Management Companies in Malaysia and Thailand.” Pacific Economic Review 21, no. 5: 603–
31.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/nonperforming-loans-and-purchase-loans-public-asset-
management-companies-malaysia-and. 
International Monetary Fund  (IMF). 2000. “Thailand: Selected Issues. ” IMF Staff Country 
Report No. 00/21, March 3, 2000.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-selected-issues-0. 
———. 2001. “Thailand: Selected Issues.” IMF Staff Country Report No. 01/147, August 20, 
2001. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-selected-issues-2. 
———. 2004. “Thailand: Selected Issues. ” IMF Staff Country Report No. 04/1, January 9, 
2004.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-selected-issues-1. 
Katharangsiporn, Kanana. 2010. “TAMC Sets Revenue Target at B32bn.” Bangkok Post , 
February 2, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-sets-revenue-target-b32bn. 
———. 2011. “TAMC Closes Doors with B10bn Profit.” Bangkok Post , June 9, 2011.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-closes-doors-b10bn-profit. 
Kawai, Masahiro and Ken-ichi Takayasu. 1999. “The Economic Crisis and Financial Sector 
Restructuring in Thailand .” In Rising to the Challenge in Asia : A Study of Financial Markets  
Volume 11–Thailand, 37–103. Manila: Asian Development Bank.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/economic-crisis-and-financial-sector-restructuring-
thailand. 
Kazmin, Amy. 2001. “Thai Banks Ready to Hand Over Burden of Bad Loans.” Financial Times, 
September 26, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-banks-ready-hand-over-burden-bad-loans. 
Khanna, Vikram. 2002. “Thai Bad Debt Agency off to Good Start – PM’s Adviser.” Business 
Times Singapore, June 14, 2002.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-bad-debt-agency-good-start-pms-adviser. 
538
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 30 ---
Leightner, Jonathan  E. 1999. “Globalization and Thailan d’s Financial Crisis.” Journal of 
Economic Issues 33, no. 2 (June): 367–73.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/globalization-and-thailands-financial-crisis. 
Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Tomás J.T. Baliño, Charles Enoch, Anne-Marie Gulde, Marc Quintyn, and 
Leslie Teo. 1999. Financial Sector Crisis and Restructuring: Lessons from Asia . Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-sector-crisis-and-restructuring-lessons-asia-0. 
Monetary Policy Group of the Bank of Thailand. 2001. Thailand’s Economic and Monetary 
Conditions in 2001. Bangkok: Bank of Thailand. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailands-
economic-and-monetary-conditions-2001 
Nabi, Ijaz, and Jayasankar Shivakumar. 2001. Back from the Brink: Thailand’s Response to the 
1997 Economic Crisis. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/back-brink-thailands-response-1997-economic-crisis. 
Pandey, Umesh. 2001. “Thai Government Sets Up Asset Manager to Absorb $31.02 Billion in 
Bad Loans.” Wall Street Journal, March 12, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-government-sets-asset-manager-absorb-3102-
billion-bad-loans. 
Pornavalai, Cynthia M. 2002. “Thai Asset Management Corporation: Objectives and Powers.” 
International Business Lawyer 30, no. 4 (April 2002): 174–85.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-corporation-objectives-and-
powers. 
Prachyakorn, Pornnalat. 2010. “TAMC Near F ull-Year Target.” Bangkok Post , July 3, 2010.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-near-full-year-target. 
Pura, Raphael. 1997. “Thailand Considers Overhaul of Bangkok Bank of Commerce.” Wall 
Street Journal, March 27, 1997.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-considers-overhaul-bangkok-bank-commerce. 
Royal Proclamation on Thai Asset Management Corporation B.E. 2544 (2001) . 2001. 
Ministerial Information Bulletin No. 9223. August 6, 2001.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/royal-proclamation-thai-asset-management-
corporation-be-2544-2001. 
Santiprabhob, Veerathai. 2003. Lessons Learned from Thailand’s Experience with Financial 
Sector Restructuring. Bangkok: Thailand Development Research Institute.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lessons-learned-thailands-experience-financial-sector-
restructuring. 
Sharma, Shalendra D. 2003. “Thailand: Crisis, Reform, and Recovery.” In The Asian Financial 
Crisis, 66–122. Manchester: Manchester University Press.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20508. 
Sonakul, M.R. Chatu Mongol. 2001. “Trends and Prospects of Thailand’s Banking and 
Financial Sector and Its Impacts on the Thai Economy.” Speech delivered at the seminar on 
Thailand’s Special Industrial Development Zone, Berlin, May 4, 2001.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/trends-and-prospects-thailands-banking-and-financial-
sector-and-its-impacts-thai-economy. 
539
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 31 ---
Tang, Edward. 2002. “Job of Reducing Thai Debt Goes to Investment Banker.” Straits Times, 
September 6, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/job-reducing-thai-debt-goes-investment-banker. 
Terada‐Hagiwara, Akiko, and Gloria Pasadilla. 2004. “Experience of Asian Asset Management 
Companies: Do They Increase Moral Hazard?—Evidence from Thailand.” Asian Development 
Bank, Economics and Research Department Working Paper No. 55. September 2004.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/experience-asian-asset-management-companies-do-
they-increase-moral-hazard-evidence-thailand. 
Thai Asset Management Company  (TAMC). 2001a. “Press Release .” October 16, 2001.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-press-release. 
———. 2001b. “Press Release.” November 1, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-press-release-0. 
———. 2001c. “Press Release.” December 3, 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-press-release-1. 
———. 2002. “Press Release.” May 8, 2002.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-press-release-2. 
———. 2005a. Website: “Risk Management Principles and Reports.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/risk-management-principles-and-reports. 
———. 2005b. Website: “TAMC History.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-history. 
———. 2005c. Website: “TAMC Manual.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-manual. 
———. 2010. “Press Release.” February 1, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-press-release-3. 
———. 2011. “Press Release.” March 3, 2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-press-release-4. 
Thai News Service . 2001a. “Four Taskforces Set Up to Study Details on TAMC.” March 21, 
2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/four-taskforces-set-study-details-tamc. 
———. 2001b. “Government Puts Establishment of TAMC on Fast Track.” April 21, 2001. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/government-puts-establishment-tamc-fast-track. 
US Department of C ommerce (USDC). 2011. Doing Business in Thailand: 2011 Commercial 
Guide for US Companies . Washington, DC: Department of Commerce, International Trade 
Administration.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/doing-business-thailand-2011-country-commercial-
guide-us-companies. 
World Bank. 2006. “Project Performance Assessment Report. ” World Bank Report No. 
35051. January 31, 2006.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/project-performance-assessment-report. 
540
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 32 ---
V. Key Program Documents  
Summary of Program 
Thai Asset Management Corporation: Objectives and Powers (Pornavalai 2002)  
An article in a law journal about the TAMC’s legal authority and powers.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-corporation-objectives-and-
powers. 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
Act Amending Royal Proclamation on Thai Asset Management Company B.E. 2544 
(Amendment 2001)  
The amendment to the TAMC Act that modified the valuation method for real estate collateral.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/act-amending-royal-proclamation-thai-asset-
management-company-be-2544-2001. 
Doing Business in Thailand: 2011 Commercial Guide for US Companies (US DC 2011)  
A report from the US Department of Commerce for US businesses on navigating the Thai legal 
environment.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/doing-business-thailand-2011-country-commercial-
guide-us-companies. 
Policy of the Government of H.E. Prime M inister Thaksin Shinawatra (Government of 
Thailand 2001)   
An outline of the major economic policy pillars of the prime minister.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/policy-government-he-prime-minister-thaksin-
shinawatra-delivered-national-assembly-monday. 
Royal Proclamation on Thai Asset Management Corporation B.E. 2544 (Royal Proclamation  
2001)  
The royal decree that established the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/royal-proclamation-thai-asset-management-
corporation-be-2544-2001. 
Press Releases/Announcements 
Announcement of FIDF’s History and Financial Position (BOT 2000b)  
 A document that overviews the creation and history of the FIDF.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/announcement-fidfs-history-and-financial-position. 
Monetary Policy in Thailand: Current Challenges and Prospects (Devakula 2001)  
A speech from the BOT governor on the challenges and opportunities in the Thai economy.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/monetary-policy-thailand-current-challenges-and-
prospects. 
Outlook for 2002 and the Road Ahead (Devakula 2002a)   
A speech from the BOT governor on the challenges and opportunities in the Thai economy in 
2002 and beyond.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/monetary-policy-thailand-current-challenges-and-
prospects. 
541
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 33 ---
Thai Authorities Take a Major Step to Resolve Property Loan Problems (BOT 1997b)   
A press release from the  BOT announcing an organization to address the problem property 
loans.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-authorities-take-major-step-resolve-property-loan-
problems. 
Thailand’s Emergence from the Crisis – New Paradigm for Sustainable Growth (Devakula 
2002b)  
A speech from the BOT governor on the challenges and opportuniti es in the Thai economy in 
2002 and beyond.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailands-emergence-crisis-new-paradigm-sustainable-
growth. 
Trends and Prospects of Thailand’s Banking and Financial Sector and Its Impacts on the Thai 
Economy (Sonakul 2001)   
A speech from an economic policymaker on the Thai financial system and its connection to the 
real economy.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/trends-and-prospects-thailands-banking-and-financial-
sector-and-its-impacts-thai-economy. 
Media Stories 
Four Taskforces Set Up to Study Details on TAMC (Thai News Service 2001a)   
An article announcing the government’s establishment of taskforces for the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/four-taskforces-set-study-details-tamc. 
Government Puts Establishment of TAMC on Fast Track (Thai News Service 2001b)    
An article announcing the government’s plan to expedite the establishment of the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/four-taskforces-set-study-details-tamc. 
Job of Reducing Thai Debt Goes to Investment Banker (Tang 2002)   
An article from the Straits Times about the leadership of the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/job-reducing-thai-debt-goes-investment-banker. 
SAM Allots B3bn for Dud Finances (Chudasri 2012)   
An article from the Bangkok Post about an AMC that acquired residual assets from the TAMC. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/clone-southeast-asia-spends-today-worries-tomorrow. 
Southeast Asia Spends Today, Worries Tomorrow (Chen 2001)   
A Reuters News article about the financial crisis responses in multiple Asian Financial Crisis 
countries.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/southeast-asia-spends-today-worries-tomorrow. 
TAMC Closes Doors with B10bn Profit (Katharangsiporn 2011)   
An article in the Bangkok Post describing the TAMC’s goals for its last year of operations.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-sets-revenue-target-b32bn. 
TAMC Must Not Be Used as a Tool for the Politically Connected (Business Day 2001)   
An article from Business Day arguing that the TAMC should not be used only for the politically 
connected.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-must-not-be-used-tool-politically-connected. 
542
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 34 ---
TAMC Near Full-Year Target (Prachyakorn 2010)   
An article from the Bangkok Post about the TAMC’s progress toward its goals in its last years 
of operations.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-near-full-year-target. 
TAMC Sets Revenue Target at B32bn (Katharangsiporn 2010)   
An article in the Bangkok Post describing the TAMC’s goals for its last year of operations.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tamc-sets-revenue-target-b32bn. 
Thai Asset Management Company Plan Approved (Amorn 2001)   
A Reuters News article announcing the approval of the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-plan-approved. 
Thai Asset Management Company to Begin Debt Transfer in July (AFP 2001)   
An article from the Agence France-Presse announcing the launch of the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-asset-management-company-begin-debt-transfer-
july. 
Thai Bad Debt Agency off to Good Start – PM’s Adviser (Khanna 2002)   
An article from the Business Times Singapore  with a statement from a top economic 
policymaker about the progress of the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-bad-debt-agency-good-start-pms-adviser. 
Thai Banks Ready to Hand Over Burden of Bad Loans (Kazmin 2001)   
An article from the Financial Times about the launch of the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-banks-ready-hand-over-burden-bad-loans. 
Thai Government Sets Up Asset Manager to Absorb $31.02 Billion in Bad Loans (Pandey 
2001) 
An article from the Wall Street Journal  outlining the TAMC and its expected impact on the 
economy.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thai-government-sets-asset-manager-absorb-3102-
billion-bad-loans. 
Thailand Considers Overhaul of Bangkok Bank of Commerce (Pura 1997)  
An article from the Wall Street Journal on the turmoil in the Bangkok Bank of Commerce.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-considers-overhaul-bangkok-bank-commerce. 
Key Academic Papers 
Experience of Asian Asset Management Companies: Do They Increase Moral Hazard? —
Evidence from Thailand (Terada-Hagiwara and Pasadilla 2004)   
An academic paper evaluating the impact of the TAMC on moral hazard behavior of banks in 
Thailand.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/experience-asian-asset-management-companies-do-
they-increase-moral-hazard-evidence-thailand. 
Financial Sector Crisis and Restructuring: Lessons from Asia (Lindgren et al. 1999)   
An IMF report on the Asian Financial Crisis and the various government responses to the crisis. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-sector-crisis-and-restructuring-lessons-asia-0. 
543
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 35 ---
Lessons Learned from Thailand’s Experience with Financial Sector Restructuring 
(Santiprabhob 2003)  
A research book on the Thai government’s response to the Asian Financial Crisis, with a chapter 
devoted to the TAMC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lessons-learned-thailands-experience-financial-sector-
restructuring. 
Nonperforming Loans and Purchase o f Loans by Public Asset Management Companies in 
Malaysia and Thailand (Inoguchi 2016)   
An academic study on the impact of AMCs on the performance of the Thai and Malaysian 
economic recoveries and the impact on bank lending.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/nonperforming-loans-and-purchase-loans-public-asset-
management-companies-malaysia-and. 
Public Asset Management Companies in East Asia (Fung et al. 2004)   
A research paper describing different AMC approaches to the A sian Financial Crisis by East 
Asian countries.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-asset-management-companies-east-asia. 
Thailand: Crisis, Reform, and Recovery (Sharma 2003)  
A book chapter about the Thai government’s response to the A sian Financial Crisis and the 
progress through 2003.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-crisis-reform-and-recovery. 
The Economic Crisis and Financial Sector Restructuring in Thailand (Kawai and Takay asu 
1999)  
A book chapter about the restructuring of the Thai financial system in the wake of the Asian 
Financial Crisis.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/economic-crisis-and-financial-sector-restructuring-
thailand. 
Reports/Assessments 
Annual Economic Report 1998 (BOT 1998)  
The annual report from the BOT describing the Thai economy in 1998 and addressing the 
government’s response to the Asian Financial Crisis .  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-economic-report-1998. 
Annual Economic Report 1999 (BOT 1999)   
The annual report from the BOT describing the Thai economy in 199 9 and addressing the 
government’s response to the Asian Financial Crisis.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-economic-report-1999. 
Annual Economic Report (BOT 2001)  
The annual report from the BOT outlining economic conditions and central bank and economic 
policy actions.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bot-annual-economic-report. 
Annual Report 2012 (BAM 2012)   
The annual report from one of the Thai asset management companies that acquired remaining 
assets after the TAMC ceased operations.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bam-annual-report-2012. 
544
The Thai Asset Management Company Dreyer

--- Page 36 ---
Project Performance Assessment Report (World Bank 2006)   
An evaluation of the World Bank–supported interventions in Thailand after the Asian Financial 
Crisis.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/project-performance-assessment-report. 
Supervision Report 1996/7 (BOT 1997a)   
The annual report from the BOT that describes the macroeconomic conditions, financial crisis, 
and government’s initial response to the Asian Financial Crisis.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-19967. 
Supervision Report 2000 (BOT 2000a)  
The annual supervision report from the BOT outlining economic conditions and central bank 
and economic policy actions.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2000. 
Supervision Report 2001-2002 (BOT 2002)   
The annual supervision report from the BOT outlining economic conditions and central bank 
and economic policy actions.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2002. 
Supervision Report 2003 (BOT 2003)    
The annual supervision report from the BOT outlining economic conditions and central bank 
and economic policy actions.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2003. 
Supervision Report 2004 (BOT 2004)   
The annual supervision report from the BOT outlining economic conditions and central bank 
and economic policy actions.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2004. 
Supervision Report 2006 (BOT 2006)   
The annual supervision report from the BOT outlining economic conditions and central bank 
and economic policy actions. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/supervision-report-2006 
Thailand: Selected Issues (IMF 2000)   
The IMF report on selected economic issues in Thailand in 2000.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-selected-issues-0. 
Thailand: Selected Issues (IMF 2001)   
The IMF report on selected economic issues in Thailand in 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-selected-issues-2. 
Thailand: Selected Issues (IMF 2004)   
The IMF report on selected economic issues in Thailand in 2004.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-selected-issues-1.  
Copyright 2021 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to 
receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program 
on Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
545
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2