--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 3 
2021 
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) 
Claire Simon 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Policy 
Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Simon, Claire (2021) "Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG)," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : 
Iss. 3, 1-15. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1211 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss3/1 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss3/1

--- Page 3 ---
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG)1 
Claire E. Simon2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
November 12, 2021 
Abstract 
Following the adoption of a joint framework by euro area countries in response to the 
intensifying financial crisis in October 2008, Austria enacted a package of measures 
including the Financial Market Stability Act (Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz , or FinStaG). In 
addition to permitting nationalization under certain circumstances, FinStaG allowed the 
Austrian government to use six specific measures to recapitalize credit institutions 
operating in Austria and Austrian insurance companies. According to FinStaG, €15 billion 
($22 billion) could be used for this purpose, though this amount was later increased. Eight 
institutions received support through FinStaG, and the government granted capital and 
liquidity support totaling €21 billion. It appears that recapitalization measures can still be 
instituted under FinStaG, but the blanket approval by the European Commission expired on 
June 30, 2011, at which point any measures would have to be considered on a case -by-case 
basis. 
Keywords: FinStaG, Global Financial Crisis, recapitalization 
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering the responses to the Global Financial Crisis that pertain to broad-based capital injection 
programs. Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at    
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
At a Glance 
Following the declaration of a joint action 
plan for E uropean Union member states in 
October 2008, Austria enacted a number of 
measures in response to the Global 
Financial Crisis. Included in this response 
was the Financial Market Stability Act 
(Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz, or FinStaG), 
which provided the legal framework for 
recapitalization of individual credit 
institutions and insurance companies.  
Under FinStaG, the Austrian government 
could utilize six  recapitalization measures 
to assist distressed or failing institutions. 
According to FinStaG, the government was 
authorized to spend €15 billion  ($22 
billion3) on these recapitalization measures, 
but this amount was subsequently 
increased to €23.5 billion . Each institution 
receiving assistance through FinStaG 
entered into a master agreement with the 
Austrian government dictating specific 
terms and conditions.  Recapitalization 
measures were carried out by a separate entity, the Federal Corporation of Financial 
Market Participation ( Finanzmarktbeteiligung), acting on behalf of the Austrian 
government. The FinStaG measures most frequently used during the crisis wer e the 
assumption of liabilities and the provision of capital, particularly participation capital.  
The European Commission (E C) issued a blanket approval of measures under FinStaG in 
line with Article 87(3)(b) of the Treaty  Establishing the European Commun ity (EC Treaty), 
which permits State Aid that prevents serious disruptions to a member state’s economy. 
This approval expired on June 30, 2011 , after being extended multiple times. As a result, 
the minister of finance retains the powers granted under FinSt aG, but any recapitalization 
measure would have to be individually approved by the EC. During the crisis, eight credit 
institutions received support through FinStaG. As of 2016, the Austrian government 
granted €21 billion in capital and liquidity support under FinStaG. 
 
3 Throughout 2008, approximately €0.7 = $1. 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose To secure the 
macroeconomic balance and 
protect the Austrian national 
economy  
Announcement 
Date:  
October 26, 2008 
Operational Date  October 27, 2008 
Expiration Date  June 30, 2009; subsequently 
extended to June 30, 2011 
Legal Authority Financial Market Stability Act 
(Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz 
, or FinStaG) 
Authorized Amount  €15 billion; subsequently 
increased to €23.5 billion 
Amount Used €21 billion 
Participants Credit institutions operating 
in Austria and Austrian 
insurance companies 
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Summary Evaluation 
What little scholarship and evaluation exists on FinStaG focuses largely on the design of the 
recapitalization framework and potential reforms that should take place in preparation for 
future crises,  rather than on gauging the recapitalization measures’ success during the 
financial crisis. For example, criticisms of the program argue that the use of participation 
capital gave the Austrian government insufficient control. 
3
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) Simon

--- Page 6 ---
Austria Context 2008–2009 
GDP 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU  
converted to USD) 
$432.2 billion in 2008 
$401.3 billion in 2009 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU  
converted to USD) 
$51,920 in 2008 
$48,153 in 2009 
Sovereign credit rating  
(five-year senior debt) 
 
As of Q4, 2008: 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
As of Q4, 2009: 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
Size of banking system $451.0 billion in total assets in 2008 
$441.2 billion in total assets in 2009 
Size of banking system  
as a percentage of GDP 
104.4% in 2008 
110.0% in 2009 
Size of banking system  
as a percentage of financial system Data Not Available. 
Five-bank concentration of banking system 81.7% of total banking assets in 2008 
75.5% of total banking assets in 2009 
Foreign involvement in banking system 28.0% of total banking assets in 2008 
26.0% of total banking assets in 2009 
Government ownership of banking system Data Not Available. 
Existence of deposit insurance Up to $133,333 in 2010 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
In response to the intensifying financial crisis, euro area countries convened at a summit in 
October 2008. The meeting resulted in a joint action plan, released on October 12, that 
called in part for national governments to work with central banks and supervisors to 
“provid[e] financial institutions with additional capital resources so as to conti nue to 
ensure the proper financing of the economy” and to allow for “an efficient recapitalisation 
of distressed banks” ( EC 2008a). In Austria, this resulted in the passage of the Financial 
Market Stability Act (Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz, or FinStaG) on October 26, 2008, as part 
of a broader Financial Market Stability Package that also contained the Interbank Market 
Support Act (Interbankmarktstärkungsgesetz, or IBSG).4 The package was approved by the 
European Commission (EC) under Article 87(3)(b) of  the EC Treaty, which permits State 
Aid that remedies a serious disturbance in a member state’s economy (EC 1957).  
Before Austria passed FinStaG, on October 17, Constantia Privatbank had to be bailed out 
by a group of five Austrian banks with assistance f rom the government. Though the bank 
had a relatively small balance sheet, it was judged to be of systemic importance to the 
Austrian economy due to its €10 billion fund management busines s. The five banks 
provided €400  million in liquidity to the bank, whi ch was backed by a government 
guarantee. Austria’s central bank also provided €50 million in liquidity. The Constantia 
bailout predated FinStaG but demonstrated the need for a legal framework for 
recapitalizing distressed banks in the context of the financ ial crisis (Komarek and 
Groendahl 2008). 
Program Description 
FinStaG allowed the Austrian government to issue guarantees, assume liabilities, and 
recapitalize distressed or failing banks. The legislation authorized the federal minister of 
finance to use six specific recapitalization measures, outlined in Figure 1 below.  
Recipients of these measures had to be credit institutions authorized under the Austrian 
Banking Act (Bankwesengesetz, or BWG) or domestic insurance companies. FinStaG also 
permitted nationalization if an institution was at risk of failing and causing serious damage 
to the Austrian econom y. FinStaG initially authorized €15 billion for these measures, but 
any leftover money from the €75  billion allocated for use under IBSG, which was passed 
alongside FinStaG, could also be used ( IBSG and FinStaG 2008 ). The legal limit was 
increased multiple times; in 2016, it reached €23.5 billion (BMF 2017). 
 
4 Whereas FinStaG permitted assistance to specific institutions, IBSG instituted a broad guarantee scheme and 
clearing bank available to all credit institutions operating in Austria and Austrian insurance companies , with 
the aim of stimulating the interbank market. See Simon (2020) for details. 
5
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) Simon

--- Page 8 ---
FinStaG did not specify an expiration date for the use of its recapitalization measures. 
However, the European Commission’s approval of the law under Article 87(3)(b) of the EC 
Treaty was granted only until June 30, 2009 (Kalss  2010, 538). This approval was 
subsequently extended multiple times until expiring on June 30, 2011, at which point each 
individual measure taken under FinStaG would have to be approved separately by the EC 
(BMF 2015b). 
To carry out the recapitalization measures authorized by FinStaG, the Austrian government 
established the Federal Corporation of Financial Market Participation 
(Finanzmarktbeteiligung AG , or  FIMBAG). FIMBAG was a subsidiary of Austrian Industry 
Holding plc ( Österreichische Industrieholding AG ,  or ÖIAG), an existing investment and 
privatization agency owned by the government (BMF 2015a). FIMBAG was also responsible 
for monitoring beneficiary institutions for compliance with the conditions established by 
their individual agreements with the government and reporting back to the Federal 
Ministry of Finance ( Kalss 2010 , 539). Once the purpose of institut ing any of these 
measures was achieved, in accordance with FinStaG, FIMBAG was required to privatize any 
shares or interests acquired by the  government ( IBSG and FinStaG 2008 ).  
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1: Recapitalization Measures Available under FinStaG 
Option  Instrument 
1 Assumption of liability (including, but not limited to, guarantees, suretyships, collateral 
promises) for obligations of the affected legal entity 
 
2 Assumption of liability (including, but not limited to, guarantees, suretyships, collateral  
promises) for obligations to the affected legal entity 
 
3 Granting of loans and supply of own funds to credit institutions pursuant to sections 23 
and 24 of the Banking Act ( Bankwesengesetz, or  BWG) and to insurance companies 
pursuant to section 73b of the Insurance Supervision Act ( Versicherungsaufsichtsgesetz, 
or VAG) 
 
4 Acquisition of shares or partnership interests or convertible bonds in connection with 
capital increases 
 
5 Acquisition of existing shares or partnership interests by legal transaction 
 
6 Acquisition of partnership or company assets by way of a merger according to sec tion 
235 of the Stock Corporation Act (Aktiengesetz, or AktG) 
 
Source: IBSG and FinStaG 2008. 
Outcomes 
According to the Austrian Ministry of Finance, eight credit institutions received some 
support under FinStaG. 5 These eight institutions included some of the largest banks 
operating in Austria, measured by total assets ( TheBanks.eu 2021 ); three of the bank s, 
Erste Group, BAWAG, and Raiffeisen Zentralbank, were among the five largest banks in the 
country (Banks around the World 2018). Of the six measures available, the most frequently 
used were provision of capital in the form of participation capital or sha reholder 
contributions and assumption of liability by the government. Under FinStaG, the Austrian 
 
5 The eight institutions were: Aviso Zeta AG (formerly Constantia Privatbank), BAWAG P.S.K . Bank für Arbeit 
und Wirtschaft und Österreichische Postsparkasse AG, Erste Group Bank AG, Hypo Alpe -Adria Bank 
International AG, KA Finanz AG , Kommunalkredit Austria AG, Österreichische Volksbanken AG , and Raiffeisen 
Zentralbank AG/Raiffeisen Bank International AG (BMF 2015b).  
7
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) Simon

--- Page 10 ---
government acquired shares in three of the banks, Österreichische Volksbanken, 
Kommunalkredit Austria, and Hypo Alpe -Adria-Bank International. Two of those, 
Kommunalkredit and Hypo  Alpe-Adria, were nationalized following their failures in 2008 
and 2009, respectively (BMF 2015b). 
The most recent publicly available data, published in April 2017, calculates that under 
FinStaG, the government granted capital and li quidity support totaling €21 billion. After 
taking repayments into account, the net total was calculated as €17 billion. As of the end of 
2016, €7.4 billion was used for subscription of capital and other capital measures. Federal 
guarantees under FinStaG a mounted to another €7.4 billion, with claims under those 
guarantees equaling €1.3 billion6 (BMF 2017). 
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a Package: The Financial Market Stability Act was part of a package of 
measures including the Interbank Market Support Act, and FinStaG consisted of 
six measures, including recapitalization. 
The Financial Market Stability Act was passed alongside the Interbank Market Support Act 
as part of the Austrian Financial Market Stability Package. This package of measures wa s 
introduced in response to the joint call from euro area countries for national legislation 
aimed at restoring financial market stability (BMF 2008). 
FinStaG authorized the federal minister of finance to use the six specific measures  
described in Figure 1. 
According to the Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance, the assumption of liability and the 
provision of capital through participation capital or shareholder contributions were the 
options most frequently used by the government to recapitalize institution s under FinStaG 
(BMF 2015b). 
The Ministry of Finance also point ed out that by assuming liability , the government 
“allowed the distressed institutions to reduce their risk provisioning, thereby freeing 
capital” (BMF 2015b). Guarantees under FinStaG were als o used during the nationalization 
of some banks during the crisis (BMF 2017). 
2. Legal Authority: FinStaG permitted the federal minister of finance to recapitalize 
certain institutions and provided the basic legal framework for recapitalization. 
FinStaG allowed the federal minister of finance to “secure the macroeconomic balance and 
protect the Austrian national economy” through recapitalization measures in order to 
 
6 Both option 1 and 2 allow ed government guarantees. It is not clear which of the two  options this figure 
refers to, but it is likely that the majority of guarantees were for obligations to credit institutions (option 2).   
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
“remedy a considerable economic disruption in Austria” ( IBSG and FinStaG 2008). FinStaG 
provided the basic legal framework for the recapitalization scheme.  
3. Legal Authority: The European Commission ruled that the recapitalization 
scheme constituted State Aid but was permitted under Article 87(3)(b) of the EC 
Treaty. 
On October 31, 2008, a little less than a week after FinStaG was enacted, Austria notified 
the European Commission of its passage. In a letter dated December 9, the EC notified the 
Austrian government that though the recapitalization scheme under FinStaG (as  well as the 
guarantees through IBSG) constituted State Aid under Article 87(1) of the EC Treaty, it was 
permitted under Article 87(3)(b) of the Treaty ( GTA 2008). Article 87(3)(b) permits State 
Aid “to promote the execution of an important project of comm on European interest or to 
remedy a serious disturbance in the economy of a Member State” ( EC 1957). This decision 
was consistent with an earlier communication published by the EC, which stated that 
Article 87(3)(b) could be used as a legal basis for aid m easures like general schemes to 
address the financial crisis (EC 2008b).  
4. Governance: The recapitalization scheme authorized by FinStaG was also 
governed by a requirements ordinance issued by the minister of finance. 
FinStaG stipulated that the federal minister of finance, with the federal chancellor, “shall 
have the authority to enact an ordinance determining the details of the conditions and 
obligations imposed for measures taken pursuant to this Federal Act” ( IBSG and FinStaG 
2008). In line with this, the federal minister of finance released an ordinance that 
stipulated the detailed provisions governing the scheme authorized by FinStaG (Kalss 
2010, 539).  
5. Administration: The Austrian government established a new company to 
administer the program. 
In accordance with FinStaG, the Austrian government established a new separate company, 
FIMBAG, as a subsidiary of the ÖIAG, the Austrian investment and privatization agency 
owned by the state. FIMBAG was authorized to carry out measures un der FinStaG and was 
required to monitor compliance with the master agreements (BMF 2015a). 
The relationship between the Austrian government and FIMBAG was contractualized by an 
Assumption Agreement. Under the agreement, FIMBAG agreed to monitor compliance,  as 
mentioned above, and fulfill certain reporting requirements to the federal government 
(Kalss 2010, 539). 
6. Timing: FinStaG had no statutory time limit, but the general scheme was 
approved by the European Commission only for a certain amount of time. 
FinStaG, unlike IBSG, did not specify an end date for the recapitalization scheme. However, 
when the EC issued its State Aid decision, it approved new measures under the scheme 
only until June 30, 2009 (Kalss 2010, 538). Austria applied for and received four extensions 
9
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) Simon

--- Page 12 ---
of this deadline, until June 30, 2011 ( GTA 2008). After June 30, 2011, any new support 
measure adopted for an individual institution under FinStaG would have to be separately 
examined and approved by the EC (BMF 2015b).  
7. Program Size: FinStaG authorized €15 billion to be used for recapitalization 
measures; this amount was subsequently increased to €23.5 billion. 
Under FinStaG, the federal government could not use more than €15 billion for 
recapitalization measures. This bu dget could be augmented if there were funds left over 
from the €75 billion that  was allocated for IBSG ( IBSG and FinStaG 2008 ). This cap was 
later increased multiple times; in 2016, a €1.5 billion increase brought the legal limit to 
€23.5 billion (BMF 2017). 
8. Eligible Institutions: The government could recapitalize credit institutions 
operating in Austria and Austrian insurance companies under FinStaG. 
FinStaG stipulated that the government could recapitalize credit institutions operating in 
Austria as defin ed by the Banking Act, which included branches of foreign banks, and 
domestic insurance companies as defined by the Insurance Supervision Act ( IBSG and 
FinStaG 2008).  
9. Capital Characteristics: Participation capital allowed the government to increase 
institutions’ equity without receiving voting rights. 
Participation capital, which was introduced in Austria 30 years before the crisis, was used 
to provide equity to credit institutions and insurance companies. In the context of the 
financial crisis, participat ion capital was seen as “a surrogate for the equity which was 
destroyed by the financial crisis and cannot be recovered through a relevant issuance of 
share capital,” (Kalss 2010, 541). Participation capital did not grant the Republic of Austria 
any position or membership rights under stock corporation law, giving the government no 
direct influence over the beneficiary institution. According to Kalss  (2010, 540) , the 
preference for participation capital stemmed from the banks’ influence on the writing of 
FinStaG and their input during individual negotiations for institutional recapitalization.   
10. Term: Conditions for recapitalization were established by a master agreement 
between each beneficiary institution and the Austrian government. 
Though FinStaG provide d the legal framework for recapitalization, once it was deemed 
necessary to use measures for a specific institution, the Austrian government and the 
relevant institution signed a master agreement dictating specific terms and conditions 
(Kalss 2010, 539). FinStaG gave the minister of finance the power to set conditions for the 
use of recapitalization measures. These conditions could regulate the orientation of the 
institution’s business polic ies (for example, providing loans to small and medium -sized 
enterprises), payment of executives and employees, the use of the funds, and distribution 
of dividends, and more ( IBSG and FinStaG 2008 ). Guidelines for these master agreements 
were established by the minister of finance’s ordinance (see “Key Design Decision No. 3”), 
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
but these guidelines were flexible  enough to be tailored to each recapitalization 
intervention (Kalss 2010, 538–39). 
11. Dividends/Pricing: Specific conditions were established for participation capital 
based on a determination of whether the beneficiary institution was sound or 
distressed. 
In determining the terms and conditions for participation capital, the beneficiary 
institution had to be judged either sound or distressed. This judgment was made in line 
with the EC’s Recapitalisation Commu nication and depended upon a variety of factors, 
including the volume of recapitalization, equity base, and risk profile of the institution 
(Kalss 2010 , 544). Sound banks were charged an interest rate in line with market 
conditions but not less than 9.3% a nnually. For distressed institutions, the minimum 
interest rate was 10% (Petrovic and Tutsch 2009).  
If a sound bank was able to raise 30% of the capital privately, the minimum interest rate 
would no longer apply. Of this 30%, a maximum of one third could be raised from existing 
shareholders (Kalss 2010, 544). 
12. Exit Strategy: Once the purpose of recapitalization was achieved, the government 
had to privatize any shares and interests. 
According to FinStaG, the government was required to privatize any shares or interests in a 
credit institution or insurance company it acquired once the economic disruption 
triggering the recapitalization measures had been remedied. The law also stated that in 
privatizing shares or partnership interests, “the situation on  the capital market shall be 
taken into account” (IBSG and FinStaG 2008).   
III. Evaluation 
FinStaG has received little attention from scholars, and most scholarship focuses on the 
design of the framework rather than on its specific outcomes. In her detailed explanation of 
the Austrian response to the financial crisis, Kalss (2010, 548) notes that the use of state 
participation capital under FinStaG “permits flexibility but also limits the possibility to 
exercise influence. Experience has shown that i nfluence and control are generally 
exercised, and work better, on a more informal level. ” In its assessment of Austria’s 
financial stability, the International Monetary Fund  also note s that the recapitalization 
framework established by FinStaG could be strengthened, for example , by increasing the 
budget for recapitalization and by giving FIMBAG a more prominent role in negotiations 
with distressed institutions to give the government mor e oversight over restructuring 
plans (IMF 2013). 
11
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) Simon

--- Page 14 ---
IV. References 
136th Federal Act: Interbank Market Support Act (Interbankmarktstärkungsgesetz) and 
Financial Market Stability Act (Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz ) (IBSG and FinStaG). 2008. 
Translation from original German, Federal Law Gazette for the Republic of Austria , October 
26, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/136th-federal-act-interbank-market-support-act-
interbankmarktstarkungsgesetz-ibsg-and. 
Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance /Bundesministerium für Finanzen  (BMF). 2008. 
“Austrian Financial Market Stability Package.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3157. 
———. 2015a. “Institutions.” Archived webpage, May 15, 2015. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/austria-bmf-institutions. 
———. 2015 b. “Measures for Strengthening and Stabilising Individual Institutions.” 
Archived webpage, May 15, 2015.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/measures-strengthening-and-stabilising-individual-
institutions. 
———. 2017. “Austrian Stability Programme : Update for the Period 2016 to 2021.” Report 
to the European Commission, April 19, 2017.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/austrian-stability-programme-update-period-2016-
2021. 
Banks around the World. 2018. “Banks in Austria.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banks-austria-0. 
European Commission . 2008a. “Declaration on a Concerted European Action Plan of the 
Euro Area Countries.” Summit of the Euro Area Countries, Paris, October 12, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/declaration-concerted-european-action-plan-euro-area-
countries-0. 
———. 2008 b. “The Application of State Aid Rules to Measures Taken in Relation to 
Financial Institutions in the Context of the Current Global Financial Crisis.” Communication 
from the Commission.  Official Journal of the Eur opean Union, 2008/C 270/02,  October 25, 
2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/communication-commission-application-state-aid-
rules-measures-taken-relation-financial. 
European Community. 1957. “Article 87 of the EC Treaty (ex Article 92).”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/article-87-ec-treaty-ex-article-92. 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
Global Trade Alert  (GTA). 2008. “Austria: Measures and P rolongations under the Law on 
the Stability of the Financial Markets and on S trengthening the Interbank Market for Credit 
Institutions and Insurance Companies.” December 9, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/austria-measures-and-prolongations-under-law-
stability-financial-markets-and-0. 
International Monetary Fund  (IMF). 2013. “Austria: Financial Sector Stability Assessment.” 
IMF Country Report No. 13/283, September 2013.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/austria-financial-sector-stability-assessment. 
Kalss, Susanne. 2010. “Measures by the Austrian Regulatory Authorities in R esponse to the 
Financial Market Crisis.” European Business Organization Law Review  11, no. 4 (December 
2010): 527–48.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3170. 
Komarek, Eva , and Boris Groendahl. 2008. “Austrian Banks, C.bank Bail Out Troubled 
Constantia.” Reuters, October 17, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/austrian-banks-cbank-bail-out-troubled-constantia. 
Petrovic, Ana, and Ralf Tutsch. 2009. “National Rescue Measures in Response to the Current 
Financial Crisis.” European Central Bank , Legal Working  Paper Series No. 8 , July 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4151. 
Simon, Claire. 2020. “Austria’s IBSG Guarantee Program (Austria GFC).” Journal of Financial 
Crises 2 (3): 593 –606. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal -of-financial-
crises/vol2/iss3/29. 
TheBanks.EU. 2021. “List of Banks in Austria.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/list-banks-austria. 
  
13
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) Simon

--- Page 16 ---
V. Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
(BMF 2008) Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance/Bundesministerium für Finanzen (BMF). 
2008. “Austrian Financial Market Stability Package.”  
Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance overview of crisis response package including FinStaG.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3157. 
(BMF 2015b) Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance/Bundesministerium fü r Finanzen 
(BMF). 2015b . “ Measures for Strengthening and Stabilising Individual Institutions .” 
Archived webpage, May 15, 2015.   
Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance description of  the Financial Market Stability Act 
(FinStaG). 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/measures-strengthening-and-stabilising-individual-
institutions.  
(BMF 2017) Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance/Bundesminis terium für Finanzen (BMF). 
2017. “Austrian Stability Programme: Update for the Period 2016 to 2021 .” Report to the 
European Commission, April 19, 2017.  
Austrian financial stability report submitted to the European Commission.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/austrian-stability-programme-update-period-2016-
2021. 
(Petrovic and Tutsch 2009) Petrovic, Ana , and Ral f Tutsch. 2009.  “National Rescue 
Measures in Response to the Current Financial Crisis .” European Central Bank,  Legal 
Working Paper Series No. 8, July 2009.   
ECB Legal Working Paper summarizing crisis response measures taken by EU member states, 
including Austria’s guarantee program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4151 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(EC 2008b) European Commission. 2008b. “The Application of State Aid Rules to Measures 
Taken in Relation to Financial Institutions in the Context of the Current Global Financial 
Crisis.” Communication from the Commission.  Official Journal of the European Union , 
2008/C 270/02, October 25, 2008.   
Communication from the European Commission addressing State A id during financial crisis.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/communication-commission-application-state-aid-
rules-measures-taken-relation-financial. 
(IBSG and FinStaG 2008) 136th Federal Act: Interbank Market Support Act 
(Interbankmarktstärkungsgesetz) and Financial Market Stability Act 
(Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz) (IBSG and FinStaG).” 2008. Translation from original  
German, Federal Law Gazette for the Republic of Austria, October 26, 2008.   
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
Group of Austrian acts, including the Financial Market Stability  Act ( FinStaG). 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/136th-federal-act-interbank-market-support-act-
interbankmarktstarkungsgesetz-ibsg-and. 
Key Academic Papers 
(Kalss 2010)  Kalss, Susanne. 2010 . “Measures by the Austrian Regulatory Authorities in 
Response to the Financial Market Crisis .” European Business Organization Law Review  11, 
no. 4 (December 2010): 527–48.  
Paper analyzing the Austrian government’s response to the financial crisis.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3170. 
Reports/Assessments 
Posch, Michaela, Stefan W . Schmitz, and Beat Weber. 2009. “ EU Bank Packages: Objectives 
and Potential Conflicts of Objectives .” Oesterreichische Nationalbank Financial Stability 
Review, no. 17 (June 4, 2009): 63–84.  
Study by Austria’s central bank comparing responses to the financial crisis across the EU . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/eu-bank-packages-objectives-and-potential-conflicts-
objectives. 
Copyright 2021 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
15
Austria: Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz (FinStaG) Simon