--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 2 
2021 
Comment Letters May Have Helped Shape Federal Reserve’s Comment Letters May Have Helped Shape Federal Reserve’s 
Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) and Main Street Lending Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) and Main Street Lending 
Program (MSLP) Program (MSLP) 
Steven Kelly 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Public Administration 
Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kelly, Steven (2021) "Comment Letters May Have Helped Shape Federal Reserve’s Municipal Liquidity 
Facility (MLF) and Main Street Lending Program (MSLP)," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 2, 
772-775. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1194 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/32 
This Archive Note is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This archive note is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss2/32

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Archive Note 
 
Comment Letters May Have Helped Shape Federal Reserve’s 
Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) and Main Street Lending Program 
(MSLP) 
|By Steven Kelly  
 
In support of the Yale Program on Financial Stability’s (YPFS) efforts to archive primary and 
secondary materials that shed light on financial crises, Cezary Podkul 1 of the Wall Street 
Journal has shared documents with us resulting from a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
request. The request, initiated on April 23, 2020, was for: 
 
. . . all comment letters received by the Fed since March 1 regarding any of the 
emergency loan facilities established by the Fed in March and April 2020 under its 
13(3) emergency lending powers . . . [and] also include letters send [sic] directly to 
Chairman Powell regarding these facilities, including any Congressional 
correspondence related to the facilities. 
 
In response to the request, the Federal Reserve released all letters regarding the Municipal 
Liquidity Facility (MLF) and the Main Street Lending Program (MSLP)  sent to the central 
bank during the requested period .2 The Fed stated that it was releasing letters regarding 
these two facilities as they were the only two for which it had invited public comment.  
 
Requesting public comment with respect to a proposed rule, or a lending facility, is one of 
the customary ways that an agency or the Fed can solicit input to evaluate response s to a 
rule or program before it becomes final. Such comment s can be particularly helpful in 
controversial matters or, as in this case, in areas of first impression; the MLF and MSLP were 
new types of lending facilities for the Fed. The released correspondence reflects a wide array 
of congressional and stakeholder  concerns: some recurring, others specific to individual 
officials. The Fed ultimately incorporated s ome of the changes and additions requested in 
these comment letters into the respective facilities. 
 
Municipal Liquidity Facility 
 
The Fed designed3 the MLF to “help state and local governments manage cash flow stresses 
caused by the coronavirus pa ndemic” by purchasing short-term notes directly from states 
 
1 The Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) thanks Mr. Podkul for sharing these documents with us. 
2 The FOIA request was received by the Fed on April 24 and granted on November 23, 2020. Letters released 
date from March 1 to approximately the date of the request; several of the released MLF comments are dated 
to late April and early May.  
3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (BdofGov), “Federal Reserve takes additional actions to 
provide up to $2.3 trillion in loans to support the economy” (April 9 , 2020). Unless otherwise specified, all 
resources mentioned in the footnotes, are available by searching the YPFS Resource Library at: 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/. 
772

--- Page 4 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Archive Note 
 
(as well as the District of Columbia ), counties , and cities . The MLF had a stated lending 
capacity of $500 billion , and t he Treasury supported the MLF with $35 billion of equity 
funding allocated by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act). 
 
The MLF release includes letters and comments from  both congressional sources and  non-
congressional ones, suc h as trade groups, state/territory officials, and other individuals.  
Among the many issues raised in the letters, the commenters nearly unanimously called for 
the Fed to lower the population thresholds  needed for a municipality’s notes to be eligible 
for the facility to purchase. The Fed’s first iteration4 of the MLF’s terms, released on April 9, 
2020, limited eligibility to “U.S. states (including the District of Columbia), U.S. counties with 
a population of at least two million residents, and U.S. cities with a population of at least one 
million residents.” Several of the commenters noted that this would only cover 10 cities and 
15 counties in the nation and would disproportionately exclude Black communities. On April 
27, the Fed revised5 the terms of the MLF to allow for “ U.S. counties with a population of at 
least 500,000 residents, and U.S. cities with a population of at least 250,000 residents.” Later, 
the Fed further eased6 population thresholds by allowing state governors with less than two 
total eligible cities and counties to designate additional municipalities for eligibility —until 
the state had at least two eligible jurisdictions. 
 
Many of the MLF comment letters called  for the Fed to lengthen the maturity of the notes 
eligible for purchase —with one letter noting the discrepancy between the MLF’s maturity 
limits and those in the Fed’s corporate credit facilities. As part of the April 27, 2020 
modifications, the Fed exten ded the maturity limit of eligible notes from 24 to 36 months. 
However, the facility never received maturity parity with the corporate facilities, which 
extended to four and five years. 
 
Several letters called for lower interest rates on the facility. On August 11, 2020, the Fed 
lowered7 the MLF’s rates across all credit ratings by a uniform 50 basis points (and slightly 
eased the adjusted rate for taxable notes).  
 
Numerous letters also called for the Fed to expand MLF eligibility to  U.S. territories and 
Tribes, with several  commenters noting that Section 4002 (10) of the CARES Act —the 
legislation that provided for the Treasury funds allocated to the MLF  and encouraged the 
creation of such a facility —specifically includes territories and Tribes in its definition of 
“State.” The Fed never expanded eligibility to these jurisdictions. 
 
 
4 BdofGov, “Federal Reserve takes additional actions to provide up to $2.3 trillion in loans to support the 
economy” (April 9, 2020). 
5 BdofGov, “Federal Reserve Board announces an expansion of the scope and duration of the Municipal 
Liquidity Facility” (April 27, 2020). 
6 BdofGov, “Federal Reserve Board announces an expansion in the number and type of entities eligible to 
directly use its Municipal Liquidity Facility” (June 3, 2020). 
7 BdofGov, “Federal Reserve Board announces revised pricing for its Municipal Liquidity Facility” (August 11, 
2020). 
773
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Archive Note 
 
Several letters, including one signed by over 40 members of Congress,  requested the Fed 
intervene directly in the secondary market for municipal securities . Despite these requests, 
the Fed never expanded the MLF or created an additional facility for such a purpose.  The 
MLF extended8 approximately $6.5 billion of credit before Congress closed9 the facility. 
 
Main Street Lending Program 
 
The Fed designed10 the MSLP to “ensure credit flows to small and mid-sized businesses with 
the purchase of up to $600 billion in loan s.” Treasury supported the MSLP with $75 billion 
of equity from the CARES Act funds.  
 
While commenters similarly raised many topics of interest regarding the MSLP, almost all 
the congressional letters call ed on the Fed to expand the facility to include nonprofits as 
eligible borrowers, which were not eligible per the original, April 9, 2020 announcement of 
the MSLP. On April 30, the Fed said,11 “The Board recognizes the critical role that nonprofit 
organizations play throughout the economy and is evaluating a separate approach to meet 
their unique needs.” On June 15, the Fed released12 a proposal for public comment , and on 
July 17, the Fed expanded13 the MSLP to include two new nonprofit lending facilities. 
 
Many of the comment letters called for the Fed to grant flexibility with respect to EBITDA -
based eligibility requirements. The April 9, 2020, term sheets limited the size of MSLP loans 
based on, among other factors, the borrower’s 2019 earnings before interest, taxes, 
depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA). Many members of Congress suggested that such a 
standard would undesirably exclude certain firms, such as growth or startup firms that have 
yet to show material earnings, or firms that, for idiosyncratic reasons, had weak earnings in 
2019 but were otherwise strong earners. However, as the Fed modified and expanded the  
MSLP facilities, eligible loan sizes for for -profit firms continued to be based on the 
borrower’s 2019 EBITDA. The MSLP extended14 approximately $17.5 billion in credit before 
Congress closed15 the facility. 
 
 
 
8 BdofGov, “Municipal Liquidity Facility transaction-specific disclosures - 5/10/21” (May 10, 2020). 
9 Kelly, Steven. “Redux: Outlook for 13(3) and Fed Crisis Response.” Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Systemic Risk Blog. 
10 BdofGov, Federal Reserve takes additional actions to provide up to $2.3 trillion in loans to support the 
economy” (April 9, 2020). 
11 BdofGov, “Federal Reserve Board announces it is expanding the scope and eligibility for the Main Street 
Lending Program” (April 30, 2020). 
12 BdofGov, “Federal Reserve Board announces it will be seeking public feedback on proposal to expand its 
Main Street Lending Program to provide access to credit for nonprofit organizations” (June 15, 2020). 
13 BdofGov, “Federal Reserve Board modifies Main Street Lending Program to provide greater access to credit 
for nonprofit organizations such as educational institutions, hospitals, and social service  organizations” (July 
17, 2020). 
14 Saraiva, Catarina, “Fed’s Aid Program for Midsize Businesses Spent Only 3% of Its Total .”  
15 Kelly, Steven. “Redux: Outlook for 13(3) and Fed Crisis Response.” Yale Program on Financial Stability.   
774
Comment Letters May Have Helped Shape Federal Reserve’s Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) and Main Street Lending Program (MSLP)Kelly

--- Page 6 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Archive Note 
 
As the above discussion illustrates, public comment can be a source of valuable information 
that assists the Fed (and government agencies in general) in calibrating rules, processes, and 
facilities in order to better implement mission  goals. The comment letters discussed above 
can be accessed through the YPFS Resource Library:  
• Cover letter of Federal Reserve FOIA response: 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/wall-street-journal-federal-reserve-foia-2020-
fed-cover-letter  
 
• Municipal Liquidity Facility letters: 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/municipal-liquidity-facility-comment-letters-fed 
  
• Main Street Lending Program letters: 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/main-street-lending-program-congressional-
comments-fed-march-1  
 
In response to the FOIA request, the Fed released only congressional comment letters 
relating to the MSLP. However, it indicated that non-congressional comments received by 
the Board regarding the MSLP are accessible at the following website: 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/mainstreetlending.htm. 
 
The YPFS Resource Library collects primary and secondary sources that YPFS consulted in 
creating case studies and other sources relating to our research on financial crises. While at 
this time the majority of our Resource Library materials relate to the Global Financial Crisis 
(2007-09), an increasing number concern other crises. YPFS Archive Notes highlight 
noteworthy content or additions to the library. 
775
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2