--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 1 
2021 
Lessons Learned: Eric Dinallo Lessons Learned: Eric Dinallo 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Economic Theory Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Infrastructure Commons, Insurance Commons, Macroeconomics 
Commons, Political Economy Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Haggerty, Maryann (2021) "Lessons Learned: Eric Dinallo," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 1, 
504-508. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1140 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss1/16 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss1/16

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Eric Dinallo 
By Maryann Haggerty 
Eric Dinallo was New York State Superintendent of Insurance from January 2007 through July 
2009. In New York, as throughout the United States, insurance companies are regulated at the 
state level. In his position as Superintendent, Dinallo oversaw the insurance operat ing 
companies of American International Group (AIG) within New York. AIG’s holding company, 
however, was supervised at the federal level. Much of AIG’s problems came from its non -
insurance subsidiary AIG Financial Products (AIGFP), which was a major presen ce in the 
market for credit default swaps (CDS), a type of derivative that was a factor behind the 2007 -
09 financial crisis. This “Lesson Learned” is based on an interview with Mr. Dinallo. 
Informal communication networks were key during a tumultuous time. 
Insurance company supervision in the United States is highly decentralized, unlike banking 
supervision. In the case of AIG, at the time the nation’s largest insurance firm, its 
interconnections with other financial firms threatened the stability of the en tire financial 
system. 
Insurance regulators from around the country belong to the National Association of 
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), through which they establish standards and best 
practices. They also communicate informally , and those informal relati onships supported 
coordinated action during the crisis. Dinallo recalls, 
It ended up becoming, frankly, a lot of phone calls, and just outright reach -outs. 
Because as you know, there ’s no meta -regulator for any of it. You ’re essentially 
relying on what I w ould say, trust with the other supervisors. It doesn ’t matter how 
big the state is or small. If they’re the primary regulator for that insurance subsidiary, 
then you kind of have to work together or not. 
I ended up doing a lot of it by phone, and by creating weekly calls with all of the states 
that had a stake in AIG. Then weekly international calls. It was definitely ad hoc. . . . 
The states, I think, work very hard to produce united results through NAIC, because 
they don’t want the perception that somehow , it’s random and hodgepodge. But the 
fact is that it’s only as good as those communications and those trusts. You can’t really 
make anyone do anything, because they are the king or queen of a castle that is [their 
particular] regulated entity. 
  
504

--- Page 4 ---
Insurance is a unique financial service, and those outside the industry needed to be 
educated. 
Insurance companies prepare financial statements using what are known as statutory 
accounting principles (SAP), as opposed to the generally accepted accounting p rinciples 
(GAAP) that other kinds of companies use. In essence, statutory accounting aims to show 
whether insurers are in a position to pay off claims. Dinallo recalls that this and other details 
of the insurance industry were unfamiliar even to top banking regulators. He draws a sharp 
line between the insurance subsidiaries that he supervised, and the parent company that got 
into trouble. Despite the problems at the holding company, the insurance operations were 
solvent. 
I was going to go out there and make statements about my confidence in the insurance 
companies of AIG. Because I did believe that on a statutory accounting basis, they had 
more than enough assets to match their long-term liabilities on a statutory accounting 
basis. Not mark-to-market. . . . 
When [New York Fed President Timothy] Geithner heard this, I made this joke. . . . I 
think he thought I was explaining the Mayan calendar to him. It was so alien and so 
weird. But basically, life insurance companies have long -term liabilities, and they 
match it with long-term assets that are going to perform by maturing 20 years from 
now. That’s why so much of the reserves are put towards basically debt, Treasuries, 
etc., that are highly rated. So that they will almost certainly, hopefully, certainly 
perform. Which means mature. You’re going to get the coupon along the way, albeit a 
small yield. 
The volatility before maturation over the 20 years does not count. 
Securities lending exposed AIG to increased risk from counterparties. 
In securities lending, the owner of a financial asset—such as stock or derivatives—lends that 
asset to its counterparty. That borrowing counterparty might be a short seller or an 
arbitrageur. The lender holds collateral—often cash—and is paid fees. The borrower hopes 
to make money, too, for instance by selling the share and buying it back for less. 
In 2008, AIG’s securities lending operation lost billions of dollars when borrowers began to 
return securities and demand their cash collateral back. AIG didn’t have that cash, because it 
was invested in mortgage-backed securities that were rapidly losing value. Those securities 
lending losses, which were separate from the CDS losses at AIG FP, were part of the reason 
for the federal bailout. 
Insurers generally considered securities lending  a low-risk business. But as Dinallo points 
out, in the case of AIG, its counterparties in securities lending were also counterparties in 
transactions at AIG FP. 
505
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
But what was happening was, as FP was getting in trouble, all the counterparty banks 
went and ripped the cash out of the securities lending agreements. They put back the 
securities and took the cash, which is their right. But the only way they knew to do 
that, and the only reason that they did it, was because they had concern about the 
company itself through being counterparties of FP. 
One of my lessons is, personally, I think securities lending is . . . make a little, lose a 
lot. It is such a marginal gain on monetizing, that I ’ve never understood why it ’s 
permitted. It just looks dangerous. AIG sh owed it was dangerous. It ’s not worth the 
wax, or whatever the word is. 
AIG’s lines of credit were not useful in the crisis. 
AIG had long-established lines of credit, but couldn’t draw on them when it needed liquidity, 
Dinallo says. 
If you want to talk about lessons learned: There’s a level at which [lines of credit] are 
worthless. Because when AIG went to access those lines of credit which they had paid 
for, for years and years and years —every one of the credit rating agencies said that 
they would be downgraded. I made the calls and was told that if they touched the lines 
of credit, they ’re going to get knocked down four levels. Every single one told me. 
Moody’s, S&P, everyone. 
I was like, “But they bought these lines of credit. ” “Yep. But if you need them then 
you're not credit worthy.” I was like, “This is circular logic. They had the risk analysis 
and foresight to get the lines of credit. ” “Nope, four levels.” Which would have been 
disastrous for the insurance companies. 
But then why even have the lines of credit? I mean, all that money spent on those lines 
of credit, and when they needed them, they were useless. Honestly useless. I mean, to 
me, that’s a lesson. If I were a CEO I would be like, “The last time I checked, when you 
need them you can’t get them, so why pay for them?” I don ’t know. Maybe the board 
makes you do it or whatever. But I would warn the board, “Look at AIG. They were 
useless.” 
Regulatory re serve requirements protect the financial system, and crisis -era 
derivatives evaded such requirements. 
Banks and insurance companies are all required to hold regulatory reserve, money they can 
use to meet obligations even in bad times. “The system is wired to have regulators and 
solvency behind it,” he says. 
Then we just invented this thing called derivatives, which we thought was alchemy or 
something. . . .If you tell Wall Street that they can sell insurance, in essence, or 
506
Lessons Learned: Eric Dinallo Haggerty

--- Page 6 ---
speculative futures, with no reserves set aside, they’re going to make a fortune. Until 
they have to pay on claims. 
My view was that we actually had somehow convinced ourselves that credit default 
swaps [were safe] —both the speculative, naked credit default swaps that [were] 
making shorts in the equities market, where you don’t even have any exposure to the 
company, [and] the insurance side, where you do have exposure to the company. Say 
they’re a counterparty for technology, or for debt or whatever. 
We had permitted both sides to be unreg ulated, and sure enough, Wall Street found 
that that was going to be a hugely profitable business. Because you don ’t have to set 
aside any money, because it was deregulated under the Commodities Futures 
Modernization Act. . . . The moment they were deregulated, they were used overnight 
to attain whatever business and outcomes and commitments [that were available] 
because you no longer had to set aside capital for the same activity. That ’s what I 
never understood. 
Insurance company solvency supports confidence and protects consumers. 
Dinallo says that guarding insurance company solvency is one of the major goals of industry 
regulation. 
I’m not trying to be trite. It’s just a fact that solvency is the best consumer protection. 
I think some people didn ’t love i t because it sounded like I was not serious about 
market-conduct supervision. But it seems to me that solvency is the best consumer 
protection there is. Because the insurance companies have obligations, and the 
number one thing is to make good on those obligations. 
Insurance companies should be regulated by insurance regulators who understand 
the industry and can explain what is needed to prevent more severe problems. 
At AIG, the holding company was regulated at the federal level by a banking supervisor, th e 
Office of Thrift Supervision. Dinallo maintains that both insurance subsidiaries and their 
holding company parents should be overseen by regulators who understand insurance 
operations. 
This is not some argument for state supervision. But I think if the c ompany is 
predominantly an insurance company, then it ought to be regulated at the holding 
company by an insurance regulator. I don't think it’s that deep. It could be New York. 
It could be someone else. We could debate who it should be. New York seemed li ke a 
logical choice for AIG. But I just think that’s kind of the way it ought to be. 
Now if the feds could develop the expertise, and the man - and womanpower to 
actually do that at a hold -co level, I’m hip with that. It doesn ’t have to be just a state 
507
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
regulator up there. But the problem is, that ’s such a huge apparatus that they don ’t 
have, and they probably will never have. 
In a crisis, understanding the industry allows a regulator to keep the most important long -
term obligations in mind, Dinallo says. 
“You just keep with the script. It’s solvency, it’s policy-holder confidence. It’s a system 
that requires money keeps on coming in, so you can pay out on the other side 30 years 
from now. It ’s different than any other financial obligation out there. You have the 
right to have a unique voice against people who will think it’s a little bit anachronistic. 
Statutory accounting, the Mayan calendar, etc.” 
___________________________________ 
Dated: April 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2019-67 
508
Lessons Learned: Eric Dinallo Haggerty