--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 2 
2021 
US Resolution Trust Corporation US Resolution Trust Corporation 
Aidan Lawson 
Yale School of Management 
Lily S. Engbith 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, 
and the Public Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lawson, Aidan and Engbith, Lily S. (2021) "US Resolution Trust Corporation," Journal of Financial Crises: 
Vol. 3 : Iss. 2, 129-175. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1167 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/6 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss2/6

--- Page 3 ---
US Resolution Trust Corporation1 
 
Aidan Lawson2  
Lily S. Engbith3 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
August 23, 2019; Revised: June 23, 2021 
Abstract 
The savings and loan (S&L) industry experienced a period of turbulence at the end of the 
1970s as sharply increasing interest rates caused much of the value of the industry’s net 
worth to evaporate due to its focus on long-term, fixed-rate mortgages. As a result, a period 
of rapid deregulation followed, and S&Ls, also called thrifts, engaged in increasingly risky 
behavior despite many being clearly insolvent. This trend of yield-seeking growth on the part 
of zombie thrifts forced the government’s hand as huge losses rendered the insurance fund 
backing the industry, called the F ederal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (F SLIC), 
essentially bankrupt. On August 9, 1989, the government passed the Financial Institutions 
Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA), which aboli shed the FSLIC and created 
the Resolution Trust Corporation  (RTC). The RTC had resolution and disposition authority 
over thrifts that had failed between January 1, 1989 , and August 9, 1992 (subsequently 
extended first to September 30, 1993 , and later to July 1, 1995).  The government initially 
gave the RTC  $50.1 billion in funding and the responsibility to manage tens of billions of 
dollars in failed thrift assets. Using a var iety of resolution methods, such as purchases and 
assumptions, insured deposit transfers, and straight deposit payoffs, the RTC was able to 
successfully resolve 747 institutions, consisting of $455 billion (book value) in assets. These 
assets were often disposed of with methods ranging from direct sales, regional and national 
auctions, securitizations, and equity partnerships.  Despite numerous concerns centered on 
gaps in its funding, inadequate internal controls, and problematic contracting procedures, 
the corporation managed a recovery ratio of approximately 8 5% from the disposal of these 
assets, and taxpayer losses amounted to an estimated $87.5 billion. The RTC shut down on 
December 31, 199 5, and transferred $7.7 billion in rem aining failed thrift as sets to the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
Keywords: Resolution Trust Corporation, resolution, receivership, conservatorship, FDIC, 
RTC, savings and loans, thrifts, asset management companies 
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering broad-based asset management company programs.  
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises  at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-
financial-crises/. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
3 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. The authors would like to thank Dr. Lee Davison, FDIC 
Historian, and Lynn Shibut, FDIC Senior Economist, for their contributions to  the development of this case 
study. 
129

--- Page 4 ---
At a Glance 
The savings and loan (S&L) industry 
experienced a period of turbulence at the 
end of the 1970s as sharply increasing 
interest rates caused much of the value of 
the industry’s net worth to evaporate due 
to its focus on long -term, fixed -rate 
mortgages. As a result, a period of rapid 
deregulation followed, and S&Ls, also 
called thrifts, engaged in increasingly risky 
behavior despite many being clearly 
insolvent. This trend of yield -seeking 
growth on the part of zombie thrifts forced 
the government’s hand as huge losses 
rendered t he insurance fund backing the 
industry, called the Federal Savings and 
Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC), 
essentially bankrupt. 
On August 9, 1989, the government passed 
the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA), 
which abolished the FSLIC and created the 
Resolution Trust Corporation  (RTC). The 
RTC had resolution and disposition 
authority over any thrifts that had failed 
from January 1, 1989, to August 9, 1992.4 
The RTC was given $ 50.1 billion in initial 
funding, as well as management duties 
over 262 failed thrifts with $115.3 billion 
in assets. Using a variety of resolution 
methods, such as purchases and 
assumptions, insured deposit transfers, 
and straight deposit payoffs, the RTC was able to successfully resolve 747 institutions and to 
dispose of $455 billion (book value) of their $465 billion (book value) in assets. These assets 
were often disposed of with methods ranging from direct sales, regional and national 
auctions, securitizations, and equity partnerships. 
Many of these transactions were done by outside contractors, as the RTC did not have the 
operational capacity to readily dispose of the assets of these thrifts, particularly in the RTC’s 
limited timeframe. The contractors usually received management and disposition authority 
for nonperforming or less -marketable assets and had recovery ratios similar to  those of  
other disposal methods. 
 
4 This end date was extended twice. First, to September 30, 1993, and later to July 1, 1995. 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: To resolve, manage, and maximize the return 
on failed thrift asset portfolios with minimal taxpayer 
cost 
 
Launch Dates  Announced: February 6, 1989 
Operational: August 9, 1989 
First transfer: August 9, 1989  
Wind-Down Dates 
 
Transfer expiration: July 1, 1995 
Last disposal: December 31, 
1995  
Size and Type of 
NPL Problem 
$80.8 billion in S&L assets 
(residential and commercial 
mortgages, consumer loans, 
mortgage-backed securities) 
Program Size Not specified at outset 
Eligible 
Institutions 
Depository institutions that were 
chartered as S&Ls and failed 
during a specified period 
 
Closed-bank only  
Usage  747 resolutions with $465 billion 
(book value) in assets 
Outcomes $455 billion (book value) 
disposed of, with 8 5% recovery 
ratio; losses of $87.5 billion 
Ownership 
Structure  
Public-owned 
Notable Features Put options allowed return of 
assets within a certain period ; 
introduced securitization of 
commercial mortgages, joint 
venture sales of troubled assets, 
and broad use of putbacks 
US Resolution Trust Corporation 
 
130
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Summary Evaluation 
Throughout its lifespan, the RTC continued operations through a 21-month gap in its funding, 
questionable internal controls, incomplete or incorrect information systems, and inadequate 
contracting procedures. Despite these serious issues, the corporation managed a re covery 
ratio of approximately 8 5% from the disposal of these assets . T axpayer losses were an 
estimated $87.5 billion of the $105.1 billion in funding that the RTC ultimately received. It 
was generally seen as successful in resolving the vast majority of these institutions and 
stabilizing a struggling industry. Just $7.7 billion in remaining assets were passed on to the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on December 31, 1995. 
  
131
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 6 ---
The Resolution Trust Corporation: US Context 
GDP 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$5.4 trillion in 1988 
$5.7 trillion in 1989 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$21,417 in 1988 
$22,857 in 1989 
Sovereign credit rating (5-year senior debt) Data not available for 1988 or 1989  
Size of banking system $3.5 trillion in 1988 
$3.6 trillion in 1989 
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
GDP 
64.3% in 1988 
62.7% in 1989  
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
financial system 
Data not available for 1988 or 1989 
5-bank concentration of banking system Data not available for 1988 or 1989 
Foreign involvement in banking system Data not available for 1988 or 1989 
Government ownership of banking system Data not available for 1988 or 1989 
Existence of deposit insurance 100% insurance on deposits up to 
$100,000 in 1988 and 1989 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; World Bank 
Deposit Insurance Dataset; Cull, Martinez Peria, and Verrier 2018.  
 
 
  
132
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
From the end of the 1970s onward, the US savings and loan (S&L) industry confront ed a 
series of wors ening problems. Higher interest rates on money market funds and other 
products caused savers to withdraw their money from S&Ls, which, at the time, had thei r 
deposit rates capped by the federal government. Because S&Ls primarily originated long -
term, fixed-rate mortgage loans and relied mostly on shorter -term deposit-based funding, 
they were quite vulnerable to changes in interest rates (Robinson 2013a). 
The initial response to this budding crisis was one of deregulation and regulatory 
forbearance. In 1980, Congress passed the Depository Institutions Deregulation and 
Monetary Control Act, gradually removing the federal government’s control over deposit 
rates and allowing S&Ls to invest in a broader range of assets  (Robinson 2013 b). This 
allowed S&Ls to raise their interest rates to attract depositors, but they were unable to 
recoup the costs due to the long -term nature of their lower-rate, primarily mortgage-based 
asset pool (Robinson 2013a). 
The composition of thrift assets also radically changed in this period. From 1981 to 1986, 
the percentage of thrift assets that were mortgage loans decreased from 78 % to 56%. S&Ls 
began to invest heavily in riskier commercial real estate loans, particularly for construction 
and development . They also invested in more volatile securities, such as junk bonds and 
derivative instruments ( Moysich 1997). The Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation (FSLIC), which insured thrifts, did not have the resources nor the capacity to 
resolve a growing number of insolvent S&Ls  (Robinson 2013 a). The Federal Home Loan 
Bank Board ( FHLBB), which was the principal regulator of S&Ls and of the FSLIC, had a 
workforce o f thrift examiners that was “understaffed, poorly trained for the new 
environment, and limited in its responsibilities and resources” (Moysich 1997). 
The supervision of thrifts was also bifurcated between the FHLBB in Washington and the 
regional Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBanks), which are privately owned, government -
sponsored enterprises (GSEs) with a mission to promote housing finance.5 As a result, many 
of the FHLBB examiners found it very difficult to report negative findings and make sure they 
were properly enforced. Solvency concerns continued to mount and, to combat this, the 
FHLBB eventually lowered net worth requirements in November 1980 and January 1982. 6 
However, newly formed S&Ls had up to 20 years to reach the minimum allowed net worth 
requirement, which the regulator lowered to 3% of insured accounts in 1982.7 Other factors, 
such as the liberalization of accounting rules and ownership restrictions, resulted in 
overstatements of capital levels and much higher leverage ratios, respectively  (Moysich 
1997). The impacts of this liberalization were explained by former FHLBB Chairman Richard 
Pratt: “Two institutions with massive negative earnings could merge and the combined 
entity could show positive income without the operation of either institution changing”  
(NCFIRRE 1993). This was because the FHLBB under Pratt’s leadership allowed companies 
 
5 FHLBanks are privately capitalized, cooperatively owned regional banks that provide low -cost funding to 
local banks, credit unions, insurance companies, and community development financial institutions. At the end 
of 2020, there were 11 FHLBanks in the US. 
6 Net worth r equirements were comparable to capital standards for commercial banks. However, the thrifts’ 
regulations used total insured deposit accounts as the denominator, rather than total assets, resulting in a 
lower overall capital requirement than banks faced. The regulator lowered the net worth requirement from 
5% of insured accounts to 4% in November 1980, and from 4% to 3% in January 1982. 
7 See footnote 3 of FDIC 2018 for information on the calculation of net worth. 
133
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 8 ---
to write off goodwill over 40 years, instead of the previous 15. Goodwill is an intangible asset 
created when one institution purchase s another for more than its book value. As a result, a 
slew of “goodwill mergers” took place. These mergers dramatically inflated the net worth of 
many institutions (NCFIRRE 1993). 
Finally, under the generally deregulatory philosophy of the Reagan administration and its 
Cabinet Council on Economic Affairs, chaired by the Treasury secretary, the FHLBB allowed 
a huge influx of new thrifts to enter the marketplace (Moysich 1997). 
Despite a decrease in interest rates in 1983, S&Ls representing 35% of the industry’s assets 
were insolvent on a tangible basis , that is, excluding goodwill  and other intangible assets . 
The FSLIC did not have sufficient reserves to resolve insolvent thrifts , and by 1986, it was 
severely undercapitalized . Yet  the S&L industry fought any efforts to shore up FSLIC’s 
reserves by raising the fees that S&Ls paid to the fund. By the end of 1988, 25 0 S&Ls with 
$80.8 billion in assets were in need of resolution. Despite its precarious position, the FSLIC 
resolved 222 S&Ls, totaling $116 billion in assets, in 1998. It accomplished these resolutions 
with “minimal cash outlays and maximum use of notes, g uarantees, and tax advantages, all 
of which make these transactions more expensive than they would have been had the FSLIC 
had adequate funds”  (Moysich 1997) . In an attempt to recapitalize the FSLIC, Congress 
passed the Competitive Equality Banking Act (CEBA) in August 1987  (US Congress 1987) . 
CEBA established the Financing Corporation (FICO), which issued approximately $10.8 
billion in zero -coupon bonds and other obligations to purchase capital stock in FSLIC  in 
1987, much like the larger Resolution Funding Corporation (REFCORP) would do later for 
the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC) (US Congress 1987, sec. 301). 
Ultimately, these efforts to save the FSLIC would not be enough. On August 9, 1989, Congress 
passed the Financial Institutions Reform, Recove ry, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA), which 
abolished the FSLIC and FHL BB and established the Savings Association Insurance Fund 
(SAIF), the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), and the Resolution Trust Corporation. The RTC 
had the monumental task of resolving a huge amount of failed thrifts that had overwhelmed 
the FSLIC (US Congress 1989, sec. 501). The legislation also established the FSLIC Resolution 
Fund (FRF), which was a branch of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) whose 
primary responsibility was winding down and managing the remaining obligations of the 
FSLIC. The FRF would also take over any remaining obligations of the RTC after its sunset 
date (FDIC 2018). 
Program Description 
On the date of its inception, the R TC assumed responsibility for 262 S&Ls that the FHLBB 
had already placed in conservatorship  since the beginning of 1989 , consisting of  about 
$115.3 billion in assets. By year -end 1989, 56 more would be placed into conservatorship  
(FDIC 2018) . A conservator ship is established when a regulatory authority appoints a 
manager, such as the RTC, to take control of a failing institution to preserve assets and 
protect depositors. It is meant to be a temporary solution providing time for the conservator 
to determine the best approach for ultimately resolving the institution (FDIC 1998). This first 
batch of thrifts that the RTC received were in considerably worse shape than the ones that 
would fail later, as they had been stuck without any recourse due to FSLIC’s own insolvency. 
With an already substantial and still increasing  portfolio, the RTC had to keep several 
mandates in mind. Most importantly, its legislation required the corporation to maximize the 
net present value of the return on any asset disposition efforts while minimizing the effects 
of these efforts on local real estate and financial markets. FIRREA also required the RTC to 
134
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
efficiently use funding  and to maximize the “availability and affordability” of residential 
property for lower-income individuals (US Congress 1989, sec. 501).8 
The RTC worked in tandem with the newly created OTS in its resolution practices. OTS first 
closed an insolvent thrift and then appointed the RTC as the conservator of the  failing 
institution. 
Per its authority in FIRREA, the OTS established new minimum capital requirements for 
S&Ls on November 8, 1989.  Those requirements included an 8% target for capital relative 
to risk -weighted assets, the same requirement that global ba nk regulators had recently 
agreed for commercial banks in the first Basel Capital Accord of 1988 (BCBS 1988). The OTS 
assessed the capital position of institutions, and those that were undercapitalized faced 
substantial restrictions—for example, on asset growth, deposit rates, and lending—designed 
to minimize losses in the event that they could not be privately recapitalized (FR 1989). 
The legislation gave the RTC the authority to act as conservator for any thrifts that the FHLBB 
had put into conservatorship since the beginning of 1989 and any thrifts that the OTS closed 
for three years after Congress passed FIRREA (US Congress 1989, sec. 501). The corporation 
then assigned each institution a managing agent  (usually an RTC staff member , who dealt 
with day -to-day operations ) and one or more asset specialists. When appointed as a 
conservator, the RTC’s goals were to: (1) promote depositor confidence ; (2) evaluate the 
condition of a given institution to determi ne the best method of resolution ; (3) operate the 
institution to minimize losses, limit growth, and eliminate any speculative activities; and (4) 
curtail lending activity as much as possible (FDIC 1998). These goals were all intended to 
minimize the losses  to the corporation; some losses were seen as inevitable . The RTC sold 
assets out of conservatorships, at resolution, and in receivership. At resolution, all remaining 
assets and liabilities were placed in receivership and the RTC either paid insured depositors 
directly or transferred their deposits to another bank or thrift. In the case of the latter, the 
RTC could also sell (transfer) some of the assets to the acquirer. 
Any remaining assets or parts of the thrift that were not sold either in conservatorship or at 
resolution were given to the RTC, which now acted as a receiver rather than a conservator. 
During receivership, the RTC’s primary objectives were asset disposition, subject to key 
mandates such as maximizing the value from sales while minimizing their effects on local 
real estate and financial markets , and maximizing the availability of property to lower -
income individuals (FDIC 1998). 
Funding Breakdown. FIRREA initially provided for the RTC to receive up to $50.1 billion to 
cover the expected losses on these resolutions. Because these funds represented a 
deadweight loss, RTC reports and other government reports sometimes referred to them as 
“loss funds.” The RTC received $18.8 billion of this sum in 1989, through a federal budget 
allocation appropriated by Congress . Under FIRREA, the RTC could receive up to 
$30.1 billion more through the Resolution Funding Corpor ation, a funding mechanism 
FIRREA created to delay the impact of the bulk of the losses on the government’s budget  
(FDIC 1998). This funding split was the result of a political compromise between Democrats 
and Republicans . Democrats supported using cheaper , on -budget financing that would 
 
8 The corporation created an Affordable Housing Disposition Program (AHDP) in April 1990  to address this 
part of its mandate. The housing units were both single and multifamily, and qualifying households had to meet 
certain income criteria and agree to live in these properties for at least a year before attempting to sell them, 
or the RTC would receive 75% of the profits from selling the asset  (FDIC 2018). Nonprofit and public agencies 
were also eligible to buy assets as part of the AHDP. For multifamily properties, thresholds for the number of 
families in certain income brackets had to be maintained. See FDIC 2018, chapter 15, for more information. 
 
135
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 10 ---
immediately increase the deficit  materially; Republicans supported  more expensive 
REFCORP financing that would be within the constraints of deficit-reduction laws and leave 
administration campaign promises intact , but would spread the cost to taxpayers over 
decades (Davison 2005). Between 1989 and 1993, Congress allocated a total of $73.8 billion 
for loss funds out of the federal budget and authorized REFCORP to borrow $30.1 billion. 
Under FIRREA, REFCORP’s mandate was to issue 30- to 40-year bonds to investors. It then 
purchased nonvoting RTC capital certificates that paid no dividends and had no value, based 
on the RTC’s deep insolvency (GAO 1989; US Congress 1989, sec. 511). FIRREA provided for 
the interest on those bonds to be covered each year by the US Treasury, the RTC, and the 
Federal Home Loan Banks, which are government -sponsored enterprises. As of 1997, the 
FHLBanks were paying $300 million per year for interest on REFCORP bonds and the US 
Treasury was paying the rest (FDIC 1998). Between 1989 and 1991, REFCORP issued a total 
of $30.1 billion in bonds. The US Treasury and the FHLBanks will continue to make annual 
payments of approximately $2.6 billion on these bonds un til 2030, although the 30 -year 
bonds issued will have matured as of 2021. T otal interest expense s were estimated at $88 
billion (GAO 1996). 
In addition to the funding from REFCORP, RTC received an initial $1.2 billion from the 
FHLBanks, also in capital certificates (FDIC 1998). 
Working capital was provided through the Federal Financing Bank (FFB) after similarly 
intensive political debate (Davison 2006a). 
Marketing Process for Failed Thrifts. In addition to managing the assets , the majority of 
which were housing -related, of these insolvent thrifts, the RTC engaged in marketing 
initiatives t o attract willing buyers for parts of or entire thrifts . The corporation place d 
advertisements with the name of each thrift  in the Wall Street Jou rnal and other related 
publications. Any interested buyers had to be cleared by the FDIC before participating in the 
resolution process.  This marketing phase normally occur red right after the corporation 
received its latest batch of fu nding, whereupon seve ral dozen failed thrifts underwent the 
process (FDIC 1998). It was in the corporation’s interest to market as many S&Ls as it could 
to minimize the losses sustained while they were in conservatorship.  It also considered 
things like regional representation, market perceptions, timely usage of loss funds (when 
Congress had dictated that the RTC had to spend loss funds quickly or return them), and the 
most cost-effective usage of available loss funds (when loss fund availability was tight). 
Valuation. Valuation occur red once a list of acceptable bidders was obtained . T he RTC 
differed in a few key ways from the FDIC ’s parallel resolution  processes for commercial 
banks.9 While internal appraisals were widel y used at the FDIC, the RTC opted to work in 
conjunction with key market participants, such as real estate and financial consulting firms, 
to obtain a more market -oriented valuation, which was often lower than that of the FDIC . 
This sped up the asset disposition process but lowered recovery ratios.  In general, the RTC 
worked in tandem with the private sector much more often than the FDIC, often contracting 
out the marketing, valuation, and sales duties for nonperforming assets, while leaving  
performing assets with the more conventional servicers. These private contracts were made 
under the Standard Asset Management and Disposition Agreement, or SAMDA (FDIC 1998). 
The RTC was also mandated to include minority or women-owned businesses (MWOBs) as 
 
9 The FDIC was the entity that conducted resolution and disposition efforts for commercial banks during times 
of normal economic activity. Prior to FIRREA, the FSLIC was the primary resolution auth ority for thrifts. 
136
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
contractors. MWOBs had a separate contracting program that commenced in the early 1990s 
and was further refined as time went on. 
For failed thrifts, the RTC held a conference after valuation of the institution’s assets to 
determine the least costly resolution option. The RTC distribute d information about the 
thrifts to p otential bidders, such as detailed financial information, proposed resolution 
structures, draft legal documents, and the projected timeframe for the resolution. Potential  
bidders then  performed due diligence on these firms and submit ted sealed bids to the 
corporation (FDIC 1998). 
Sometimes the RTC also conducted bidders’ conferences for assets that remained in 
receivership after deposits were paid off or the thrift had been sold. The process was similar, 
and the RTC used these conferences to explain the transaction and answer questions before 
bids were submitted. The assets sold were usually nonperforming or assets that had not been 
sold off during the conservatorship or resolution process (FDIC 1998) . Additionally, the 
corporation engaged in direct sales of assets as its portfolio continued to grow. The methods 
of resolution and disposition are described in detail below. 
Resolution Methods 
Figure 1: RTC Resolution Methods 
Method Description 
Purchase and assumption (P&A) Healthy institution purchased  all deposit liabilities 
and some or all assets of a failing institution.  
Insured deposit transfer (IDT) All insured deposits were transferred to  a healthy 
institution. RTC sold remaining assets. 
Straight deposit payoff (SDP) RTC paid out money to cover depositors and sold 
remaining assets. Complete liquidation. 
Accelerated resolution program (ARP) A type of  P&A done before conservatorship, with a 
more thorough valuation and more qualified 
bidders. 
Source: FDIC 1998. 
As illustrated in Figure 1 , above, the RTC had three primary methods of resolution when it 
was appointed as a conservator for a failed thrift. First, in purchase and assumption (P&A) 
transactions, a solvent institution purchased , either wholesale or piecemeal , the assets and 
deposit liabilities (including all insured deposits) of a distressed thrift (FDIC 1998). Second, 
insured deposit transfers (IDTs) involved the bulk transfer of insured and secured liabilities 
to a healthy institution. The depositors of the failed banks were given a “transferred deposit” 
account at the acquiring institution, which acted as the RTC’s agent  (FDIC 2019). Third, in 
straight deposit payoffs (SDPs), no assets or liabilities were assumed, and the RTC directly 
paid insured depositors at resolution; the RTC paid uninsured depositors their share of asset 
recoveries (net of expenses) gradually over time (FDIC 2019). Fourth, the RTC started an 
Accelerated Resolution Program (ARP)  to resolve thrifts with substantial franchise val ue 
prior to putting them into conservatorship in the summer of 1990. The process for the ARP 
tended to use more selective solicitation methods and more thorough valuation processes to 
ensure more assets would be sold at resolution  (FDIC 1998). MWOBs were included in the 
resolution process in such a way that minority bidders had preference if they were the same 
137
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 12 ---
ethnicity as the previous owner, or if a property was located in an area where 50% or more 
of the residents were minorities.10 
Asset Disposition Methods 
Figure 2: RTC Asset Disposition Methods 
Source: FDIC 1998. 
Figure 2 (above) illustrates the various asset disposition methods utilized by the RTC. In 
general, performing assets tended to be the target of disposal first, as they were easier to 
market and sell off. Initially, any real estate sales that were done by the RTC had to be for no 
less than 95% of whatever the RTC-appraised market value was (FDIC 1998).11 
Though primarily used as a method of disposing of the failed thrift’s deposit liabilities , P&A 
transactions also allowed potential buyers to select some (or all) of a failed thrift’s assets, in 
addition to their insured deposits. The corporation began using regionally based auctions in 
June 1991. Small loans were placed into pools or packages of loans that were then sold off to 
willing bidders. This system of regional auctions was phased out in 1992 in favor of a 
National Loan Auction Program that provided a common forum for regional RTC field offices 
to market hard-to-sell assets. By December 1990, the RTC also had adopted a securitization 
process to sell troubled assets . The securities were collateralized by  assets such as 
commercial mortgages, multifamily properties, consumer loans, and other types of 
nonperforming loans. For many of these securities, the RTC provided external credit support 
through the use of cash reserves and other methods  to ensure that they would be rated 
highly (FDIC 1998). 
Equity partnerships were another novel mechanism for asset disposition. Generally, the RTC 
acted as a limited partner (LP) in conjunction with an industry-savvy private sector investor 
as a general partner (GP). The LP contributed pools of nonperforming assets and real estate 
while the GP provided asset management services. Both the LP and the GP provided equity 
capital. The GP also was completely responsible for the management and disposition of 
whatever assets the LP contributed and received some of the proceeds from the net recovery 
on these assets in lieu of management fees (FDIC 1998). 
The final method of disposition involved the use of RTC contracting a greements, called 
SAMDA contracts. These had an initial term of three years, with the option of three one-year 
 
10 These preferential rules were followed only if the minority bid was less costly than a deposit payoff. The 50 
percent rule was adopted in 1993. 
11 This requirement was amended to 70% in March 1991 to attract more willing buyers and accelerate the asset 
disposition process. 
Method Description 
Auctions (regional and national) Sealed-bid auctions of packages of loan portfolios 
were valued and marketed privately.  
Securitizations Commercial and residential assets were packaged 
for sale to GSEs or private buyers. 
Equity partnerships Joint private/public partnership s sold troubled 
assets. 
Asset management/sale contractors   SAMDA contractors assumed all responsibility of 
disposition and (sometimes) management of 
assigned assets. No multi-asset sales were allowed. 
138
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
extensions. There were two types of SAMDA contracts, with the differences largely based on 
how the disposition fees were paid out to private contractors (FDIC 1998). 
The RTC also included features like asset putback provisions, or “put” options, as well as 
extensive representations and warranties (R&Ws) to encourage the timely disposition of its 
portfolio. Put options allowed acquirers to perform due diligence and return any S&L assets 
that they did not wish to keep within a specified timeframe. This window was usually 
between 30 and 90 days but was increased to 18 months in the spring of 1990. R&Ws were 
guarantees to buyers that whatever assets they purchased would meet certain quality 
requirements. These requirements were gradually broadened to be more in line with those 
offered in private markets in the early 1990s (FDIC 1998).  Figure 3 (below) describes the 
periods of asset disposition.  
Figure 3: Periods of Asset Disposition (1989–1995, USD billions)12 
Oversight. In 1990, the RTC established an Office of the Inspector General (OIG) and was 
also subject to the new Chief Financial Officers Act (CFOA) of 1990. This act required the RTC 
and any other government corporations to submit audited financial statements and r eports 
to Congress (FDIC 1998). In the original iteration of FIRREA, the RTC also had (1) a five -
member Oversight Board, which handled much of the general administrative and 
organizational policing of the corporation; and (2) an exclusive manager in the FD IC (US 
Congress 1989, sec. 501). This governance structure allowed the RTC to more readily draw 
on existing FDIC resolution and operational expertise, rather than having to start from 
scratch. As discussed in more detail below, this governance structure evolved over time. 
Outcomes 
The RTC immediately became responsible for 262 conservatorships from FSLIC on August 9, 
1989, and opted to resolve the S&Ls with the least franchise value first (FDIC 1998 ; FDIC 
2018). In the initial phase of the S&L crisis, the RTC had less than two months to spend its 
$18.8 billion in appropriated funds due to the fiscal year ending and its appropri ations 
expiring (FDIC 1998). These 262 thrifts were also in significantly worse condition than 
thrifts that failed later in RTC’s lifetime, and expensive to keep open. 
Because of the tight timeframe, many of the resolutions in 1989 were straight deposit payoffs 
and insured deposit transfers, despite the associated costs being higher. The RTC also used 
this initial $18.8 billion to lend to thrifts in conservatorship at relatively low interest rates, 
replacing high -cost funding from certificates of deposit (C Ds). This helped lower the 
operating losses for insolvent S&Ls. Concerns from politicians and local institutions about 
excessive dumping of troubled assets hampered the corporation’s resolution efforts. A 
 
12 Sales of thrifts occurred at resolution. Securitizations were done during conservatorship. Assets out of 
receiverships were either sold at auction or placed in SAMDAs or equity partnerships.  
Time Assets Percentage of Total 
During conservatorship $157.7 39% 
At resolution $75.3 19% 
During receivership $169.6 42% 
Total $402.6 100% 
Source: FDIC 1998. 
139
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 14 ---
shortage of willing buyers, despite ample invitations to bid on failed thrifts, also contributed 
to the RTC sustaining heavy operating losses in the first three years of its lifespa. The 
majority of the corporation’s losses occur red during this time period  (FDIC 1998). Other 
initiatives, such as the widely  successful “Operation Clean Sweep” (discussed below) and 
less-successful asset putback provisions, were part of the corporation’s early efforts. 
As the initial impact of the crisis became less pronounced, the RTC’ s losses lessened and it 
was able to dispose of more assets in more varied ways. Due to their cost-effectiveness, P&A 
transactions—and ARP transactions as a subset —became the primary method of franchise 
resolution and a significant part of asset disposition, as well. Other initiatives, such as equity 
partnerships, in -house securitization, broad auction systems, and the widespread use of 
contractors all were effective means of asset disposition  (FDIC 1998) . There were some 
delays, however. 
As described below in Figure 4, the Resolution Trust Corporation Financing Act (RTCFA) of 
1991 and the Resolution Trust Corporation Refinancing, Restructuring, and Improvement 
Act (RTCRRIA) of 1991 gave the RTC an additional $30 billion and $25 billion dollars in 
funding, r espectively (US Congress 1991 a; US Congress 1991 b). However, the RTCRRIA 
stipulated that, in the case of the RTCRRIA, funding had to be used before April 1, 1992 (US 
Congress 1991b). The RTC was unable to use all of the $25 billion from RTCRRIA before the 
deadline and was forced to give $18.3 billion back to the Treasury.  The RTC did not receive 
any new appropriations or funding from either Congress or REFCORP until December 17, 
1993, when the Resolution Trust Corporation Completion Act (RTCCA) of 1993 was passed, 
after a perio d of 21 months. 13 As a result of this funding gap, the number of days until 
resolution increased to 596, or more than 19 months. RTCCA allowed the remaining $18.3 
billion to be used to finish th e resolution and disposition processes. Over the course of the 
RTC’s lifespan, the average length of a conservatorship lasted approximately 13 months 
(FDIC 1998). 
Figure 4: Sources of Funding (USD Millions) 
Source: FDIC 1998. 
The RTC was then able to finish managing the crisis, sustaining total losses of  about 
$87.5 billion of the $105.1  billion in total funding . Despite the problematic nature of a 
significant portion of its assets, the corporation managed an overall asset recovery rate of 
approximately 87%. From its inception on August 9, 1989 , to its closing date on December 
31, 1995, the RTC resolved a total of 747 failed thrifts, with $402.6 billion and $315.4 billion 
 
13 The RTCCA also extended the RTC’s conservatorship/receivership authority from September 30, 1993 , to 
July 1, 1995. 
14 The RTCCA of 1993 released the leftover $18.3 billion that was given to the RTC as a result of RTCRRIA (1991) 
but not committed before the April 1, 1992 , deadline. RTCCA all owed the corporation to use these  funds to 
finalize the resolution and disposition of any remaining assets. These funds are excluded from the funding total, 
as a result. 
Legislation Appropriation REFCORP FHLBanks Total 
FIRREA (1989) $18.8 $30.1 $1.2 $50.1 
RTCFA (1991) $30 — — $30 
RTCRRIA (1991) $25 — — $25 
RTCCA (1993) —14 — — — 
Total $73.8 $30.1 $1.2 $105.1 
140
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
in assets and deposit liabilities at failure , respectively (FDIC 1998) . These outcomes are 
discussed in detail below. 
Market Conditions. Financial markets, particularly early on in the  crisis, were extremely 
risk-averse to the RTC’s asset disposition efforts , as most of these came from failed 
institutions. In the first quarter of 1990, for instance, more than  7,500 institutions were 
invited to bid on 52 thrifts that had already been resolved. Yet only 194 submitted bids, and 
only two of the transactions were to purchase a whole thrift, indicating that the market 
thought not only that there was a glut of thrifts but also that the ir assets held little value 
(FDIC 1998). The FDIC also had receivership assets from banks that it was attempting to sell, 
and the comparatively smaller number of willing bidders—healthy banks and thrifts—may 
have depressed activity. Assets under RTC control peaked at $175.6 billion in the first  
quarter of 1990, when the crisis was at its height.  There was a large buildup of assets early 
on, and the RTC ’s disposition efforts struggled to keep pace with the inflows from failed 
thrifts. This massive asset overhang, illustrated below in Figure 5, did not help market 
perceptions of the corporation. This fed into criticism about the RTC’s pace of  asset 
disposition—which some felt was too slow. 15 Beginning in 1991, a combination of more 
aggressive sales strategies and fewer thrifts failing allowed the RTC to reduce its holdings. 
 
15 See “Key Design Decision No. 4 – Communications” and the “Evaluation” section for more information on this 
criticism. 
Figure 5: Assets under RTC Management (USD Billions, 1989–1995) 
Source: RTC 1995b. 
141
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 16 ---
Asset putback provisions, often called put options, enabled acquirers to return any assets 
that they did not ultimately want. The RTC sold about $40 billion in assets with put options 
attached. While this approach was initially thought to have sped up asset disposition, more 
than $20 billion in assets was ultimately returned through this method (FDIC 1998). 
Despite concerns about the additional administrative burden and substantial claims costs, 
the RTC found that asset sales with representations and warranties were generally more 
profitable. For instance, single -family mortgages were expected to sell nearly 200 basis 
points to 300 basis points higher with R&Ws than without, while costs were expected to be 
in the range of just 24 basis points to 36 basis points ( Moreland-Gunn, Elmer, and Curry  
1996). 
Resolution Methods 
Figure 6: Results of RTC Resolutions (USD Millions)  
Figure 6 (above) describes the results of the various asset disposition methods used. P&As 
made up about two-thirds of the RTC’s resolutions in its six-year lifespan, representing $161 
billion of failed thrift deposit liabilities. IDTs and SDPs comprised the other third of 
resolutions, or about $39.4 billion of failed thrift deposit liabilities.  SDPs were much more 
common early on in the crisis . In 1989, for instance, the majority of resolutions were SDPs 
and IDTs despite their being costlier resolution methods. This was largely due to the need to 
use the $18.8 billion in original funding before the fiscal year ended  and to the fact that the 
thrifts that failed early in the crisis were in significantly worse shape than those that failed 
later. Of the 92 SDPs that took place, 84 occurred between 1989 and 1991 (FDIC 1998). 
Combined, the average cost of the three major resolution mechanisms as a percentage of 
total assets was about 21.8%. P&As were, predictably, the most cost effective of these, while 
IDTs and SDPs were not used as often and were significantly more expensive as a percentage 
of total assets . The Accelerated Resolution Program, though not widely used due to the 
funding drought in 1992 and 1993, was used to resolve 41 failed thrifts.  These institutions 
represented $20.2 billion of total failed thrift deposits, and the RTC’s losses were lowest f or 
ARP institutions. Eighty percent  of all conservatorships, or 567, were for thrifts that had 
$500 million in assets or less (FDIC 1998). 
The RTC’s approach to quickly minimizing its initially high operating losses was best seen in 
Operation Clean Sweep. From March 21, 1990, to June 30, 1990, the RTC resolved 155 thrifts 
with $44.4 billion and $38.7 billion in total assets and deposits, respectively. The total cost 
of these resolutions —which were largely for smaller thrifts—came in at an estimated $18 
billion, which was well under the $32 billion allocated for the project. Seventy-eight of the 
resolutions, totaling $36.6  billion in assets, were P&As. IDTs and straight deposit payoffs 
Method Number Assets Deposits Cost 
Cost/ 
Assets 
Purchase and assumption (P&A) 456 $185,048 $161,000 $62,395 33.7% 
Insured deposit transfer (IDT) 158 $30,211 $31,000 $15,974 52.9% 
Straight deposit payoff (SDP) 92 $7,830 $8,400 $6,375 81.4% 
Accelerated Resolution Program (ARP) 41 $21,811 $20,200 $2,800 12.8% 
Total 747 $244,900 $220,60
0 
$87,544 21.7% 
Sources: FDIC 1998; RTC 1995b. 
142
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
made up just $7.8 billion, or 17.6% of the total volume of assets. Operation Clean Sweep 
helped improve public confidence in an unpopular program (FDIC 1998).  
Asset Disposition Methods 
Figure 7: Estimates of RTC Disposition Efforts (USD Billions) 
Of the $105.1 billion in financing given to the RTC via direct appropriation or through 
REFCORP, $87.5 billion was used as loss fund s. However, 94.4% of these losses, or $82.7 
billion, occurred from 1989 through 1991. This very clearly illustrates the RTC’s objective of 
handling the least marketable institutions first. The assets from these thrifts couldn’t be sold 
directly or auctioned off because the ir market value was substantially less than the 95 % 
minimum disposition price required by FIRREA. Some assets were able to be disposed of at 
resolution, usually via P&A transactions. While few P&As were whole-thrift, the RTC pushed 
heavily for the disposal o f assets during the resolution process and, by the end of the 
program, $75.3 billion in assets had been disposed of at the time of resolution. Less than half 
of the assets that the RTC managed were retained for disposition during the receivership 
process (FDIC 1998). 
A total of 20 regional and national loan auctions were conducted  from June 1991 to 
December 1995. The RTC sold more than 141,000 loans at these auctions and achieved a 
recovery ratio of 48.8%. National auctions had a much higher recovery value  of 58.6%, 
compared with 22.3% for regional auctions (FDIC 1998). 
The RTC’s securities that were backed by residential and multifamily real estate sold very 
well, making the corporation the third -largest issuer of residential mortgage-backed 
securities (R MBS) at the time, behind Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The RTC’s massive 
commercial mortgage securitization efforts helped blossom that industry from $6 billion in 
1990 to $80 billion by 1997. As shown in Figure 7, above, RTC securitizations also performed 
very well relative to other disposition methods. As of June 30, 1997, only three of the 74 RTC 
and FDIC securitizations experienced significant losses (FDIC 1998). 
 
16 “Number” is the total number of securities issued by the RTC. “Assets” represents the original value of the 
securities issued. “Recovery” represents the total cash proceeds (the sum of net cash at closing, residual cash 
flows, and credit reserve fund releases) as of September 30, 1997. 
17 “Number” is the number of equity partnerships engaged in by the RTC, not including judgements, charge-
offs, and deficiencies (JDCs). See Table I. 17-3 in FDIC 1998 for more information. “Recovery” is the net present 
value of the RTC’s net collections. 
18 “Number” is the number of contracting agreements issued. “Recovery” represents gross collections from the 
RTC. These collections exclude all loan payments made prior to 1993, and any collections for assets withdrawn 
by the RTC were recorded as the lesser of 90% of an asset’s estimated recovery value or its derived investment 
value. See Table I. 14-13 in FDIC 1998 for more information. 
19 The sum of disposition efforts is not calculated becaus e of heterogeneity across asset disposition methods. 
The number of assets ultimately disposed of in each method is not known.  
Method Number Assets Recovery Avg. Recovery 
Auctions (regional and national) 20 $4.9 $2.4 48.8% 
Securitizations16 74 $42.2 $40.6 95.2% 
Equity partnerships17 42 $9.0 $4.1 45.6% 
Private contractors18 199 $46.4 $23.3 50.2% 
Total —19 $102.4 $70.4 68.8% 
Source: FDIC 1998. 
143
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 18 ---
Equity partnerships allowed the corporation to retain a role in how its assets were managed 
and curry additional interest with potentially willing acquirers . As a whole, equity 
partnerships performed as well as or slightly better than other RTC resolution methods, such 
as auctions, multi-asset sales transactions, and sealed bids (FDIC 1998). 
Over the course of the RTC’s term, 199 SAMDA contracts spanning 91 different contractors 
were issued. These contractors had net collections of about $18.9 billion. At the end of the 
program, on December 31, 1995, about $2.1 billion in assets remained and were given to the 
FDIC along with the rest of the RTC’s assets. Owned real estate (ORE) assets represented 
$18.7 billion, or 40.3% of total SAMDA assets, with a collection ratio of 51.3% (FDIC 1998). 
Losses and Recoveries 
Seven hundred and forty -seven institutions were resolved by the RTC, and from 1986 
through 1995, the number of thrifts in the US declined from 3,234 to 1,645. Cost estimates 
varied widely, but the FDIC suggested, after factoring in costs from the RTC, the FSLIC, FRF, 
and any indirect costs, that the total public sector losses were about $123.8 billion. Private 
sector loss estimates were high too, at $29.1 billion (FDIC 2000). 
The General Accounting Office (GAO) reported that direct costs were a bit higher, at $160.1 
billion, with $87. 5 billion in direct costs to the RTC  (GAO 1996). Overall recovery rates on 
asset disposition efforts have been estimated at about 85% (Shorter 2008). A total of $7.7 
billion in failed thrift assets remained as of December 31, 1995, which were transferred to 
the FRF. Of the approximately $465 billion (book value) in assets that the RTC was tasked 
with disposing, it managed to dispose of approximately $455 billion ( book value), or 98 %. 
The bonds issued by REFCORP, which had either 30 - or 40-year maturities, were paid off 
between 2019 and 2021 (30 -year) or still are being paid off until 2030 (40 -year). Total 
estimated interest costs were about $2.6 billion annually. The FHLBanks contributed $300 
million annually until 2011, when the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) declared that 
the interest obligations of the FHLBanks had been met and allowed the banks to allocate 
funds that would have been used to pay interest o n REFCORP bonds to be paid into new 
restricted retained earnings accounts ( FHFA 2011 ). The remaining $2.3 billion was paid 
through appropriations. 
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a Package: The Resolution Trust Corporation was a part of a package of 
programs established through the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery , and 
Enforcement Act of 1989 to address the S&L crisis. 
FIRREA created t he Resolution Trust Corporation and abolished the Federal Home Loan 
Bank Board and Federal Savings and Loan Ins urance Corporation , while transferring the 
remaining duties of managing the FSLIC’s affairs to the FDIC-run FSLIC Resolution Fund (US 
Congress 1989, sec. 501). The Office of Thrift Supervision supervised privately held thrifts 
and closed them when they became insolvent. The RTC coordinated with the OTS at the point 
of failure to ensure a smooth transition. Any responsibilities for managing failed thrifts then 
fell on the RTC.  The FDIC became responsible for failures once the RTC’s responsibilities 
ended. 
144
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
2. Legal Authority: Congress passed FIRREA on August 9, 1989, to provide the legal 
basis for the Resolution Trust Corporation. 
Title V, Section 501, of FIRREA established the RTC and its Oversight Board, as well. It stated 
specifically that the duties of the RTC were to “manage and resolve” depository institutions 
that were insured and had been placed into conservatorship by the FSLIC from January 1, 
1989, to August 9, 1989 . Additionally, it gave the RTC resolution authority over any S&Ls 
that would become insolvent in the three-year period following August 9, 1989 (US Congress 
1989, sec. 501). 
3. Mandates: Congress mandated that the RTC balance the interests of the taxpayers 
with the potential social and economic impacts of its asset sales. 
In FIRREA, Congress gave the RTC several mandates that often conflicted with one another. 
The RTC was required to: 
(1) Maximize the net present value (NPV) of the return on any asset disposition efforts 
or sales. 
(2) Minimize the impact that these disposition efforts would h ave on local real estate 
and financial markets. 
(3) Maximize both the “preservation and affordability of residential real property for 
low and moderate-income individuals” (US Congress 1989, sec. 501). 
These mandates could conflict. For instance, the first obj ective might involve the sale of as 
many assets as possible, as quickly as possible, to ensure the highest rate of return. In doing 
so, however, this could be considered “dumping” and potentially impact local real estate and 
financial markets. Additionally , compliance with the affordable housing mandate could 
involve reserving certain portions of the asset portfolio for lower -income buyers, which 
could increase costs to the RTC (FDIC 1998). FIRREA and RTCRRIA gave the RTC mandates 
to include MWOBs in their contracting agreements and established an Office of Minority and 
Women Outreach and Contracting Program. In 1992, for instance, MWOBs received 
approximately $323 million, or 28 %, of total fees, which was close to the 30 % target that 
RTC had set (GAO 1993b, 3). 
4. Communications: The RTC’s communication efforts largely centered on 
emphasizing the protection of depositors and minimizing losses to the taxpayer, 
while committing to being as transparent as possible. 
Much of the RTC’s early history was fraught with severe political backlash, primarily due to 
the speed of its cleanup and the allocation of its funds. Representatives Frank Annunzio (D-
IL) and Car roll Hubbard  (R-KY) were two of the program’s earliest detractors. 
Representative Annunzio went on record saying, “The American people are disgusted with 
the lack of progress of the savings and loan cleanup. Every constituent is deeply frustrated 
with the slow pace of the RTC and the Justice Department .” He also railed  against the 
company’s extensive use of put options, which provided acquirers a “free ride period” (RTC 
Task Force 1990b). 
Representative Hubbard echoed this sentiment , stating that “support for this operation is 
gone” and that the corporation “cannot get another dollar of public funds for this operation 
until the taxpayers’ interests come first . . .” (RTC Task Force 1990b). 
145
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 20 ---
Both of these accounts, as well as those of others on the House Committee on Banking, 
Finance, and Urban Affairs, signified a dwindling pool of public support , if not one that had 
already completely evaporated so soon into the program’s lifespan. 
In this same 1990 congressional session, then –Chairman of the Oversight Board Nicholas 
Brady, the Treasury secretary, explained that the government’s primary goal when creating 
the RTC, first and foremost, had been to protect depositors. Brady addressed the claim of 
being too lenient on thrifts: “We are not bailing out shareholders of S&Ls, we are not bailing 
out management, we are not in this to prese rve the institutions; in fact, many will be lost. 
[Money] spent [is] spent to protect depositors”  (RTC Task Force 1990 b). Much of his 
communication to the committee was that the problems facing the industry were much more 
widespread than previously thought and that the RTC wasn’t in the business of speculating 
on future losses. He did say that, based on the current economic climate, losses were likely 
to range from $90 billion to $130 billion, which ultimately was slightly more than what the 
RTC ended up su staining. Brady ended his statement by reaffirming the RTC’s original 
commitment made by President Bush , to “protect depositors, clean up the industry at the 
least cost to the taxpayers, and punish the criminals” (RTC Task Force 1990b). 
The philosophy of “depositors first ,” according to RTC resolution data, show ed up in the 
composition of the corporation’s resolution strategies throughout its lifespan.  Early on, the 
RTC opted to engage in more rapid resolution methods via straight deposit payoffs and 
insured deposit transfers for many of the thrifts that had been in conservatorship prior to 
FIRREA. Using these tools, depositors who had been in limbo were made whole much more 
quickly than if the RTC had used the marketing and solicitation tactics necessary to complete 
a purchase and assumption transaction, despite their usually resulting in lower costs (FDIC 
1998). 
William Seidman, then–chairman of the RTC, reinforced the ideas in Brady’s testimony with 
his own about two years later. Seidman explained that, of the 646 institutions that the RTC 
had become responsible for, it had closed 511, and approximately 16 million depositors, with 
average balances of about $9,000,  had been protected. In his rundown on the program’s 
operations, Seidman also talked about the RTC being, “committed to a philosophy of 
openness and public accountability” (RTC Task Force 1992). To this end, Seidman cited (1) 
the establishment of a “Public Reading Room,” which synthesized more than 29,000 inquiries 
from the RTC’s creation through July of 1991, and (2) the creation of regional “Public Service 
Centers,” which processed about 20,000 inquiries in the same time period  (RTC Task Force 
1992). 
Because the Oversight Board and RTC executives were required to regularly  meet with 
members of Congress, these publicly available testimonies and discussions made up a 
substantial part of the RTC’s communications efforts.20 
5. Ownership S tructure: The RTC was wholly owned and operated by the US 
government. 
Under the original legislation, the FDIC acted as the day -to-day manager of the RTC and the 
RTC’s board of directors was identical to the FDIC’s . The RTC was responsible for any 
administrative costs (US Congress 1989, sec. 501). This structure was created because the 
FDIC did not want to “shoulder the burden of conducting the S&L cleanup without having 
 
20The RTC also faced a substantial amount of criticism from the G eneral Accounting Office (GAO) , now the 
Government Accountability Office, during its early years. The specifics, as well as the RTC’s subsequent efforts 
to address them, are outlined in the “Evaluation” section. 
146
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
any say in how the cleanup would be run”  (Davison 2005). While the Bush administration 
did not like the idea of ceding further control of the RTC to the FDIC, they recognized that 
sharing responsibility with the FDIC would provide it some insulation in case the RTC ran 
into problems (Davison 2005). 
6. Governance/Administration: The Corporation was managed at first by the FDIC 
and had a five -member Oversight Board , but Congress gave it more operational 
independence in 1991. 
The members of the Oversight Board consisted of the following: 
(1) The secretary of the Treasury; 
(2) The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors; 
(3) The secretary of Housing and Urban Development; and 
(4) Two “independent members” appointed by the president with the advice of the 
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urba n Affairs . These members ha d 
three-year terms and had to be from different political parties  (US Congress 1989, 
sec. 501). 
The board had several important functions, such as the ability to establish national and 
regional advisory boards, evaluate audits co nducted by the Office of the Inspector General, 
and generally review the corporation’s performance. In addition, a variety of internal 
controls were adopted with the passage of FIRREA. 
(1) The RTC receive d an annual audit by the General Accounting Office  (now the 
Government Accountability Office) with the help of an independent CPA. 
(2) The RTC was required to submit annual reports that included audited financial 
statements. 
(3) The Oversight Board was authorized to remove the FDIC as exclusive manager if the 
FDIC failed to adhere to the strategic plan, failed to maintain or achieve financial 
goals, committed fraud or abuse, and/or failed to obtain value that was close to the 
market value of the assets it was selling. 
(4) The clearly defined sunset date of the corporation acted as an internal control 
mechanism as well, to ensure that the government would not remain as a major 
player in the mortgage market for longer than necessary  (US Congress 1989, sec. 
501). 
The RTC was authorized to have contractors take part in its resolution activities, provided 
they complied with any relevant FIRREA provisions and acted as a fiduciary for the assets 
under contract. These contractors could not be in any way affiliated with or be employed by 
any RTC-managed institution. 
Additionally, the RTC Oversight Board was required to appear twice a year before the House 
Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs and answer questions about the RTC’s 
activities. The board also published annual r eports from 1989 to 1995. Section 501 of 
FIRREA specified a “semiannual appearance” by the members of the RTC’s Oversight Board 
to report on: 
147
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 22 ---
(1) Matters of thrift resolution and asset disposition; 
(2) Cost estimates for remaining resolution and disposition efforts; 
(3) The impacts that asset disposition efforts were having on local real estate and 
financial markets; and 
(4) Estimates of remaining costs and exposure, additional income, and funding needs  
(US Congress 1989, sec. 501). 
The annual reports, which were publicly available, contained audited financial statements 
from the corporation, overviews of its asset disposition methods, and comments from the 
Oversight Board of the RTC (later the Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board) about the 
corporation’s operation. Extensive statistics about the number and cost of resolutions for 
individual institutions, as well as the number of conservatorships, were also made publicly 
available through these reports (RTC 1995a). 
However, the passage of the Resolution Trust Corporation Refinancing, Restructuring, an d 
Improvement Act of 1991  on December 12 streamlined much of the RTC’s administrative 
structure and gave it more freedom to act independently . Some of the issues included  “the 
RTC’s need for interim funding and concerns that its dual board structure was cumbersome 
and inefficient (for example, the Oversight Board had to approve policies recommended by 
the RTC/FDIC board . . .” (Shorter 2008, 2). Ultimately, RTCRRIA did the following: 
(1) Repurposed the RTC’s Oversight Board as the Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight 
Board, which no longer included the secretary of Housing and Urban Development  
(US Congress 1991b, sec. 302); 
(2) Abolished the RTC’s board of directors (US Congress 1991b, sec. 310); 
(3) Removed the FDIC as the exclusive manager of t he RTC (US Congress 1991 b, sec. 
314); and 
(4) Established the Office of the Chief Executive Officer of the RTC . The CEO was a 
presidential appointee (US Congress 1991b, sec. 201). 
While the RTC was originally envisaged to not hav e very many employees, staff levels 
ballooned as well after 1989, rising more than 200% and remaining elevated through the 
corporation’s “peak” years (i.e., 1989–1991). Around 2,000 employees were transferred to 
the FDIC when the RTC closed its doors at the end of 1995. See Figure 14 for a breakdown of 
RTC staffing levels. 
7. Size: The size of the RTC’s balance sheet was constrained by congressional funding 
limits and deadlines , which Congress increased twice in response  to continued 
widespread stress in the thrift industry. 
The OTS appointed the RTC as the conservator of any previously FSLIC -insured thrifts that 
became insolvent within the period specified by FIRREA  (US Congress 1991 b, sec. 201 ). 
FIRREA imposed a maximum outstanding obligation limit of $50 billion on the corporation, 
calculated as the sum of (1) total contributions from REFCORP ; and (2) total outstanding 
obligations, minus the sum of (a) the total amount of cash held and ( b) the amount equal to 
85% of the RTC’s estimate of the fair market value of other assets held  (US Congress 1989). 
This language required the RTC to return to Congress if it needed more funding, which it did 
on two separate occasions. S ome of the funding came with a deadline tha t mandated any 
148
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
unused funds to be returned to Congress. The RTC had to return to Treasury $18.3 billion of 
the $25 billion allowed under the RTCRRIA because it was not used before the deadline of 
April 1, 1992, even though the funding was appropriated only in January of that same year 
(RTC 1992). This event marked the beginning of a 21 -month-long funding drought for the 
corporation that severely hampered its resolution efforts  (FDIC 1998). Because of its loss -
bearing function, the RTC was, predictably, quite controversial, but the decision to so closely 
tie its funding to Congress remains quite controversial. 
8. Funding Sources: The RTC received $50.1 billion in initial funding from Congress, 
through FHLBanks, and via the Resolution Funding Corporation. 
The funding of REFCORP was a topic of substantial congressional debate. While the RTC 
could have been funded completely through appropriations, the costs would have more 
significantly impacted the federal deficit in the short term (Adams, Peck, and Spencer 1992). 
Of the original $50.1 billion , $18.8 billion  was on budget, appropriated by Congress, and 
expected to be used by the end of the 1989 fiscal year (September 30, 1989). Off-budget 
initial funding totaled $31.3 billion, with $1.2 billion provided by Federal Home Loan Banks 
and $30.1 billion raised by REFCORP. REFCORP was managed by the FHLBanks system and 
issued long-term (30- to 40-year) debt onto public securities markets to obtain funding. With 
this funding, REFCORP then purchase d nonvoting RTC capital certificates that paid no 
dividends. Interest on the bonds was paid by the FHLBanks and the US Treasury (FDIC 1998). 
Structuring the funding this way, Bush administration o fficials said, “would allow [ the 
administration] to have an increased revenue base under which to finance Federal programs 
without increasing the deficit or exceeding Gramm-Rudman targets” (Dowd 1989). 
While the original $50.1 billion was a mix of taxpayer, REFCORP, and FHLBanks funding, the 
RTCFA of 199 1 and the RTCRRIA of 1991 gave the RTC $30 billion and $25  billion, 
respectively, in taxpayer funding. These funding infusions brought the total to $105.1 billion 
for loss sharing (US Congress 1991 a; US Congress 1991b). Approximately $87. 5 billion in 
direct taxpayer losses were ultimately incurred (FDIC 1998). 
All loss funds were provided via Congressional appropriations, REFCORP, or FHLBanks, and 
the RTC was to take on any losses realized. Losses were calculated by determining how much 
the RTC needed to pay to cover depositor claims, then estimating how much it would recover 
from the sale of that institutions’ assets. Any amount recovered from these sales was 
considered working capital. 
The RTC also had the capacity to file in bankruptcy court to recover on losses. For instance, 
the FDIC and RTC both filed a $6.8 billion claim against Drexel Burnham Lambert, Inc. in 
1990 due to heavy junk bond –related losses incurred by 45 institutions under its 
management. In the end, the firm settled through a series of structured settlements that 
entailed periodic cash payments to the FDIC, RTC, and dozens of failed private institutions 
that had been clients of the firm. Drexel’s bankr uptcy arrangements set aside a percentage 
of the firm’s estate to pay, on a pro rata basis, the litigators (FDIC 2018). 
9. Eligible Institutions: FIRREA stated that the RTC would have resolution authority 
over depository institutions that were FSLIC -insured and in conservatorship 
during a defined period. 
The newly  created Office of Thrift Supervision was responsible for placing any insolvent 
thrifts into conservatorship and appointing the RTC as the resolution authority (US Congress 
1989, sec. 201). Any thrifts that had been in conservatorship from January 1, 1989, to August 
9, 1989, which was the day FIRREA was passed, were eligible  (US Congress 1989, sec. 501). 
149
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 24 ---
Additionally, the OTS could appoint the RTC as a conservator for any failed S&Ls for three 
years following the passage of FIRREA (US Congress 1989). 
As part of its mandate in FIRREA, the OTS was required to establish new minimum capital 
requirements for S&Ls. On November 8, 1989, these requirements were entered into the 
Federal Register (see Figure 8, below): (1) a risk-based capital requirement of 8%, equivalent 
to the level global bank regulators had recently agreed in the first Basel Capital Accord; (2) 
a leverage ratio requirement; and (3) a tangible capital requirement (FR 1989). 
Figure 8: Initial OTS Capital Requirements for Thrifts 
Type of Requirement Amount 
Risk-based 8% of risk-weighted assets 
Leverage ratio Core capital at 3% of total assets 
Tangible capital Tangible capital at 1.5% of total assets 
Source: FR 1989. 
A notable design aspect in these requirements was the decision to “grandfather” portions of 
supervisory goodwill—the kind that allowed thrifts to overstate their capital levels to begin 
with—into the calculations of tangible and core capital levels over a li mited timeframe. 
Specifically, the requirements allowed a percentage of supervisory goodwill —obtained 
through “the acquisition, merger, consolidation, purchase of assets, or other business 
combination”—if it had been recorded on or before April 1989  (FR 1989). This amount 
gradually declined starting in 1992 and was eliminated after 1994 (FR 1989). 
Noncompliance was punished differently if it was documented before or after 1991. Thrifts 
that did not meet these requirements prior to t hat year faced restrictions on asset growth 
and were required to submit capital plans to the OTS that detailed how they would satisfy 
the requirements. After 1991, the penalties for falling under the standards were more severe. 
The OTS prohibited asset growth; reduced the rates paid on savings accounts ; prohibited 
taking new deposits and issuing new accounts; and even prohibited lending, the purchase of 
loans, and other investments (FR 1989). According to FDIC Senior Economist Lynn Shibut, 
there were no quantitative “triggers” for resolution, however, so only institutions that were 
insolvent were closed by the OTS. 
10. Eligible Assets: All assets of failing savings and loans institutions were eligible. 
The vast majority of the RTC’s assets were real  estate related, with abo ut half consisting of 
commercial and residential mortgages. All other types, such as owned real estate, other 
assets/loans, and securities made up the other half of its portfolio (FDIC 1998). 
11. Acquisition (Mechanics 1): The RTC was appointed as the conservator or receiver 
of a thrift by the Office of Thrift Supervision after the OTS declared the institution 
insolvent. 
Initially, the RTC was eligible to act as a resolution authority for institutions put into 
conservatorship from January 1, 1989, to August 9, 1992. This horizon was extended twice—
first, to September 30, 1993 , with the passage of the Resolution Trust Corporation 
Refinancing, Restructuring, and Improvement Act of 1991, and finally to July 1, 1995 , with 
the passage of the Resolution Trust Corporation Completion Act of 1993 ( US Congress 
1991b; US Congress 1993). 
150
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
12. Acquisition (Mechanics 2): The RTC adopted conventional resolution methods 
used by the FSLIC and FDIC. 
The RTC resolved 747 insolvent institutions through a variety of conventional resolution 
methods. These were purchases and assumptions, insured deposit transfers, and straight 
deposit payoffs. P&As were the RTC’s preferred method of resolution, as they were the most 
cost-effective.21 However, they required a lengthy marketing, valuation, and bidding process 
that IDTs and SDPs did not need. About two-thirds of resolutions were done through P&A s. 
By the spring of 1990, the RTC also allowed individual branches  of failed thrifts to be 
purchased, thus encouraging a broader group of acquirers to participate (FDIC 1998, 131). 
IDTs were slightly more cost -effective than a n SDP due to the agent (purchasing) bank’s 
ability to offer its services to new potential depositors  (FDIC 1998, 19). Resolution via a 
deposit transfer was also preferable because it allowed depositors continued access to their 
funds. SDPs were used earlier on but were costlier than the other two due to the RTC having 
to directly pay off all deposit liabilities and take on all assets. 
In the event that a resolution prior to insolvency could save taxpayers money, the RTC and 
OTS developed the Accel erated Resolution Program on July 10, 1990. The corporation 
theorized that early conservatorship for thrifts that still had some market value would cost 
more to the taxpayer due to the negative public connotation around conservatorship . The 
goal behind the ARP was to provide an expedited avenue of assistance aside from  
conservatorship that still had substantial franchise value and had not been declared 
insolvent by the OTS. Rather than use broad solicitation methods, the RTC market ed more 
selectively, using the FDIC’s National Marketing List  (the List) in conjunction with the OTS  
(FDIC 1998). The List aggregated sets of potential acquirers into one database, and the RTC 
Marketing Section targeted specific potential buyers based on the types of assets that it was 
scheduling to sell  (RTC 1991 ). Valuation was generally more thorough because  the 
corporation wanted all of a failed thrift’s assets to be offered at sale. While conventional RTC 
resolutions sometimes had assets sold before the resolution process, ARPs had all of a thrift’s 
assets on sale. No put options were available for ARP tran sactions.22 Generally, loans were 
sold to asset -only acquirers at higher prices than t he RTC’s valuation s, though lower than 
prices the FDIC value d them at. This reflected the difference in valuation methodologies, 
where the RTC was more likely to accept bids that were lower because it tended to account 
for marketplace realities (FDIC 1998). 
Institutions that were resolved via the ARP all were done t hrough P&As, and 41 of the 747 
resolutions were ARP. The program’s effect was limited in part due to the RTC’s 
appropriation expiring on April  1, 1992, and the 21 -month funding gap that followed. The 
costs for resolutions under the program were much less, and a greater percentage of assets 
tended to be purchas ed (FDIC 1998) . However, the underlying financial condition of the 
thrift was a more significant factor in determining costs than was the chosen strategy. 
13. Acquisition (Pricing): The RTC acquired failed thrifts whole and at book value 
when taking them into conservatorship. 
Because the RTC functioned as the interim replacement for an insolvent deposit insurer —
FSLIC—all thrifts that the OTS put into conservatorship were given the RTC as a conservator. 
 
21 It is important to note that thrifts that were healthier tended to be selected for P&As, whil e those with less 
franchise value or negative equity were more likely to be resolved with either deposit transfers or payoffs. In 
general, the underlying condition of the thrifts was a bigger determinant of costs than the method of resolution. 
22 However, there were standard representations and warranties agreements on all ARP transactions. 
151
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 26 ---
Therefore, the initial acquisition of a failed thrift was at book value, less any provisions that 
the firm had made at that point. RTC staff then determined the value of the failed thrift’s 
assets, which helped allocate loss funds and served as a basis to evaluate franchise sale bids. 
14. Recovery and Disposal (1): The RTC  experimented with various approaches to 
selling assets, including auctions and more novel securitizations and private  
sector partnerships. 
Much of the corporation’s early efforts in resolution focused on tackling the institutions that 
had the least franchise value and were taking on the most losses. To  quickly resolve these 
institutions, the RTC relied heavily on straight deposit payoffs and insured deposit transfers. 
The RTC conducted more SDPs in the earlier years of its lifespan due to the number of 
institutions that had been deemed insolvent for an extended period of time or were located 
in acutely distressed markets and had very little franchise value. 23 IDTs and SDPs, for these 
institutions, were the only real methods of resolution left, per FIRREA standards. Because of 
these conditions, the majori ty of IDTs and SDPs were conducted from 1989 through 1991, 
when the stresses of the crisis were most prominent (FDIC 1998). These were the years that 
the RTC incurred the vast majority of its losses. 
For assets that were held onto after resolution, t he RTC employ ed a number of novel 
measures to sell its more distressed assets first, while recovering more from their 
disposition than it might otherwise have received. 
Pricing. The RTC hired contractors to perform Asset Valuation Reviews (AVRs), which were 
estimates of the value of assets held by failed thrifts. These estimates were used to evaluate 
franchise sale bids. Early on, the RTC’s AVR methods were critiqued for potentially 
overstating the value of receivership assets, due to the staff’s lack of asset  sales experience 
and its decision to sample portfolios prior to acquisition. 24 The RTC ultimately overhauled 
its AVR framework in 1991 and began using more sophisticated statistical techniques to 
better approximate the recovery value for all sampled asset s. Additionally, for each sample 
the corporation hired “a single experienced contractor” to do all the AVR work (RTC 1991). 
Regional and National Loan Auctions.  A total of 20 regional and national loan auctions 
were conducted from June 1991 to December 199 5. The corporation established the 
National Loan Auction Program in September 1992 to better dispose of the considerable pool 
of “hard-to-sell” assets (FDIC 1998). These auctions generally lasted about two to three days, 
and potential bidders were required to put down a $50,000 deposit to participate  (FDIC 
1998). 
Approximately 141,000 loans, with a book value of $4.9 bi llion, were sold for about 
$2.4 billion, netting the RTC an average recovery value of about 48.8% of book value. Total 
national auction costs ran to about $30.6 million (FDIC 1998). 
There was a wide variety of loans available for sale, and one of the challenges that the RTC 
faced was that small loans, just like the larger, more complex ones, required the same amount 
of administrative due diligence. Regional auctions were designed to sell this large inventory 
of small assets that the RTC had. Thus, it was often in the RTC’s best interest to package and 
 
23 See Figure 1 for a detailed breakdown of resolution methods. 
24 Prior to 1991, valuation took place on samples that were chosen prior to acquisition, or before the acqui rer 
purchased the “good” (i.e., performing) assets and left the “bad” assets to be handled by the corporation. 
Because these valuations were then projected across the rest of the portfolio, this may have overstated the 
value of assets remaining in receivership (RTC 1991). 
152
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 27 ---
quickly dispose of them to increase its capacity to handle larger accounts. National auctions 
grew out of the increasing number of nonperforming and hard -to-sell loans , which 
eventually prompted  the RTC to relax its criteria for what loans would be allowed in the 
auctions. While the program originally was designed for nonperforming loans, eligibility 
widened as the auctions went on to include performing loans that were not able to be 
securitized, were underperforming, or had other problems that made them unmarketable . 
Owned real estate generally included any real property that had a title that was acquired by 
foreclosure, a deed in lieu of foreclosure, or that was intended to protect the thrift’s interest 
in any residual debts that had been contracted. Broker listings, normally con ducted by 
SAMDA contractors, were the primary method through which the RTC disposed of ORE, but 
auction methods become more popular as its ORE holdings grew (FDIC 1998). 
Additionally, the corporation did not want to disenfranchise smaller potential bidders and, 
as a result, stratified some loan packages in its National Loan Auction Program to keep their 
value below $2 million so that the RTC’s Small Investor Program could market them to 
smaller, noninstitutional investors. ORE was a particularly challenging portion of the RTC’s 
portfolio. Because it was often acquired under particularly stressful circumstances, ORE was 
often lumped into pools with other nonperforming loans and related instruments. Significant 
growth in the corporation’s ORE portfolio forced it to turn to an auction method to more 
rapidly dispose of its portfolio of these assets (FDIC 1998). 
Use of Contractors.  Since the RTC was so quickly expected to resolve and dispose of 
hundreds of billions of dollars of assets, FIRREA specifically mentioned that the RTC would 
be allowed to use private contractors so long as the corporation determined that 
“. . . utilization of such services [were] practicable and efficient” (US Congress 1989). 
RTC contractors, operating under Standard Asset Management and Disposition Agreements, 
were normally given loans or asset pools that were either nonperforming or had less 
franchise value overall. The RTC did not have the staffing nor the requisite experience in 
asset disposition to properly value, market, and sell many of the hard-to-sell assets, and thus 
chose to rely more heavily on private contractors (FDIC 1998). 
SAMDAs typically had terms of three years but had the option of three one -year extensions, 
if needed. Original SAMDA contracts, called SAMDA I, had their fee structures tied to the sales 
of individual assets. SAMDA II contracts, which began in April 1991, had their dispositio n 
fees tied to the performance of the entire pool of assets that the contractor was managing. 
These contracts could also be amended to include only asset management and not 
disposition responsibilities. 25 Per the name of the contracting agreement, these en tities, 
which were often asset or property management firms, had full management and disposition 
authority. Entities under a SAMDA contract were also mandated to enter into subcontracting 
agreements with other firms to help them speed up parts of the dispo sition process. A total 
of 199 SAMDAs w ere issued to 91 contractors, covering about $48.5 billion in failed thrift 
assets (FDIC 1998). 
Securitization. The RTC helped pioneer a substantial private securitization effort starting in 
December 1990. This initiative was done because many of the assets had several undesirable 
qualities, such as “documentation inaccuracies, servicing problems, and late payments” 
(FDIC 1998). As the need to reduce the size of the RTC’s balance sheet increased, so too did 
the types of collateral that the corporation made eligible for securitization. Other assets, 
including commercial mortgages, multifamily properties, and consumer loans , were 
 
25  These amendments were called Standard Asset Management Agreements, or SAMAs, which were 
amendments to the structure of a SAMDA contract. 
153
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 28 ---
included as time went on. The RTC was forced to deal with informational deficiencies, 
particularly with its commercial securities, that hampered its sales. The Corporation would 
eventually author Portfolio Performance Reports (PPR) that would go on to become industry 
standards amongst issuers of securities (FDIC 1998). 
To ensure that there would be sufficient demand for private securities, the RTC initially 
pushed for a government guarantee on them. However, the RTC’s Oversight Board did not 
support a gove rnment guarantee due to the corporation’s temporary nature and the 
potential for its securities to compete with others issued by the US government. When this 
failed, the RTC instead backed them with cash collateral for external credit enhancement 
features, such as overcollateralization, subordination, and cash reserve funds to ensure they 
would receive high ratings  (FDIC 1998). The cash reserves often were in excess of 30 % to 
40% (Effros 1997). 
To increase the pool of potential investors, the RTC also tied the interest rate of many of the 
residential MBS to the London interbank offered  rate, making them more attractive to 
international buyers. Additionally, many of the commercial securities also had substantial 
representations and warranties, such as repurchase agreements and environmental 
indemnifications, which made purchasing them more attractive (FDIC 1998). 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were involved in an initiative called the Agency Swap Program, 
in which they either engaged in cash sales to buy pools of conforming residential mortgages 
or swap ped these pools of mortgages for Fannie a nd Freddie securities. Due to their 
agreements with the RTC, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac also required significant credit 
enhancement on the part of the corporation to take  on the pools of loans. 26 Approximately 
$6.1 billion of conforming residential mortgages were sold to the GSEs (FDIC 1998). 
The RTC also launched a commercial securitization program in January 1992, which was one 
of the precursors to the commercial real estate securitization boom that followed shortly 
after the S&L crisis. These commercial securities comprised commercial loans that often had 
missing documentation, were in arrears, or had multiple original lenders. As a result, large 
credit-enhancement levels were necessary to obtain high credit ratings from rating agencies. 
There were a total of 72 residential and commercial MBS transactions, totaling $42.2 billion 
(FDIC 1998). 
Equity Partnerships. The RTC formally introduced these partnerships in the fall of 1992, in 
part due to the huge inventory of nonperforming loans that it still held. In these partnerships, 
the RTC acted as a limited partner (LP) and provide d troubled assets while a private entity 
acted as the general partner (GP) and manager of these assets. Equity capital was provided 
by both the LP (as asset pools) and the GP. Addi tionally, the GP received a pro rata portion 
of the proceeds from the net recovery on any assets (FDIC 1998). 
The corporation believed that, for hard -to-sell pools of assets, joint ventures were a more 
cost-effective method of disposing of them compared to  a direct sale  (FDIC 1998). These 
partnerships later were expanded and geographically parsed out so that the corporation 
could more widely market them to smaller, noninstitutional investors, similar to their 
auction-based efforts. 
The RTC was originally scheduled to be shut down on December 31, 1996. However, this 
shutdown date was moved up to December 31, 1995, with the passing of the Resolution Trust 
 
26 This credit enhancement was usually in the form of cash reserves withheld from the purchase price of the 
loan pool. 
154
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 29 ---
Corporation Completion Act in 1993  (US Congress 1993) . If any thrifts remained in 
conservatorship or receivership after December 31, 1995, the FSLIC Resolution Fund 
became responsible for them ( FDIC 2018). Additionally, all assets and liabilities of the RTC 
were transferred to the FRF, which then transferred any profits from the sale of these assets 
to REFCORP to help it pay off any residual debts. 
In total, the RTC used seven different types of equity partnerships ov er the course of its 
operation.27 A total of 72 partnerships, comprising $21.4 billion (book value) in assets, were 
created, with the LP and GP receiving proceeds based on their share of ownership  (FDIC 
1998). 
15. Disposition Features : To help facilitate its asset disposition efforts, the RTC 
included put -option clauses and robust representations and warranties to 
encourage potential buyers to take on more troubled assets. 
Asset putback provisions, or put options, were often used in li eu of more robust 
representation and warranty agreements early during the S&L crisis. The initial terms on 
these provisions were anywhere from 30 to 90 days but were extended to 18 months in the 
spring of 1990. The RTC sold about $40 billion in assets that  had put options on them, and 
more than  $20 billion were returned, indicating that institutions often pick ed and chose 
which assets to keep (FDIC 2018). 
The RTC was initially hesitant to include robust, market-oriented R&Ws, as they represented, 
in theory, a substantial source of potential liabilities if the asset was not of sufficient quality 
or managed well. However, a product without R&Ws was seen as being potentially riskier. 
Initially, the RTC tried to avoid putting R&Ws on its sales of loans largely d ue to a lack of 
experience, and in some cases opted to use put-option clauses as a way to avoid using them 
(Moreland-Gunn, Elmer, and Curry  1996). The risk -based concerns, as well as the RTC’s 
relative lack of experience in selling troubled assets, made se lling much of its loan portfolio 
much more difficult throughout the early 1990s (Moreland -Gunn, Elmer, and Curry  1996). 
As a result, the RTC eventually ended up expanding its R&W criteria to be more in line with 
what market participants were offering (Moreland-Gunn, Elmer, and Curry 1996). 
16. Recovery and Disposal (3): Initially, the RTC was required to sell assets of 
distressed thrifts at a minimum of 95 % of the market value established by the 
corporation. 
Valuation for loan sales was normally done through appraisals and in consultation with Wall 
Street investment houses and other, similarly qualified firms. For structured transactions, it 
used an asset valuation methodology called derived investment value (DIV), which 
“attempted to value individual assets packaged for portfolio sales as investors would 
perceive the value of those assets” (FDIC 1998). This threshold was, in March 1991, reduced 
to 70% with an amendment to FIRREA to accelerate the disposition process (FDIC 1998). 
17. Timeframe: Although the RTC initially had a sunset date of December 31, 1996, it 
ceased operations one year earlier. 
The RTC Completion Act of 1993 amended both the sunset and eligibility dates to December 
31, 1995, and July 1, 1995, respectively (FDIC 1998). The 30- to 40-year REFCORP bonds are 
 
27 See FDIC 2018, chapter 17, for more information on equity partnerships. 
155
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 30 ---
still being paid down today , with the last bonds set to mature in 2030.  Total interest costs 
were projected to be around $88 billion (GAO 1996). 
III. Evaluation 
FIRREA and its related legislation mandated the RTC to publish detailed, audited reports and 
to give  access to any information necessary to conduct analysis on the corporation’s 
performance to  other organizations, such as the G eneral Accounting Office, now the 
Government Accountability Office  (US Congress 1989, sec. 501). One of the many reports 
that GAO released addressed the myriad funding concerns , information system 
inadequacies, and administrative difficulties  that the RTC dealt with during the crisis (GAO 
1993a). GAO even went as far as to “designate the RTC as one of 18 high-risk institutions that 
were particularly vulnerable to fraud, waste, and mismanagement” (GAO 1995a). 
Funding Concerns. The most evident example of the corporation’s serious funding troubles 
was the $18.3 billion in loss funds that the RTC was required to return after April 1, 1992 , 
because it was not able to use all the funds before the appropriation from RTCRRIA expired 
(FDIC 1998). Just as the initial funding of the RTC was politically contentious, the prospect 
of providing it with more funds—and, consequently, more taxpayer exposure to losses—was 
something that neither party was keen on doing (Davison 2006b). Neither party in Congress 
wished to appropriate more funds to an institution that they felt had resolved institutions 
too slowly. While the Senate proposed a  straightforward additional $30  billion in loss 
funding for the corpor ation, several proposals emerged in the House. These ranged from 
requiring any additional funding above a certain threshold to be deficit -neutral and a 
proposal to ‘bail-in’ state governments where a high number of failed thrifts existed by 
forcing them to pay 25% of the costs. In the end, however, the Resolution Trust Corporation 
Funding Act of 1991 that ended up passing largely resembled the original $30 billion Senate 
bill with some additional requirements on reporting, minority contracting, management 
reforms, and affordable housing provisions (Davison 2006b). 
GAO explained the importance of continued RTC funding, as the Office of Thrift Supervision 
had already flagged 8 3 additional thrifts with $46 billion in total assets that were likely to 
fail in the next year  (GAO 1993 a). Without funding, the RTC would have been unable to 
undergo its resolution procedures, resulting in costly delays. This gap in funding would cause 
the number of resolutions to fall to just 60 in 1992, compared to 211 in 1991, and the average 
number of days until resolution to rise to 596, from 429 in 1991 (FDIC 1998). 
The funding of REFCORP was expensive for the FHLB anks, which were required to p ay 
interest on its bonds.  It was predicted that such contributions to REFCORP would 
substantially reduce the banks’ net income and, as a result of the adverse effect on the banks’ 
ability to pay dividends to members, the thrift industry’s net income would also decline. This, 
however, was a deliberate decision to partially bail -in the thrift industry, though ultimately 
the amount provided by the FHLBanks—both outright and in interest payments —was 
relatively minor. Additionally, the issuance of the REFCORP bonds themselves also was a 
point of contention. GAO reported that long -term REFCORP bonds were sold at rates that 
were higher than equivalent Treasury debt, which resulted in an additional $3 billion in 
interest costs to REFCORP that could have potentially been avoided (GAO 1991). 
Information Systems. GAO also criticized the RTC’s in efficient and inadequate Real Estate 
Owned Management System (REOMS), citing that many of the records were missing key data 
points. The report specifically mentioned that “ [a]bout 80 percent of the unsold properties 
156
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 31 ---
on REOMS lacked one or more key data elements, such as listing price, date listed for sale, 
and identification of broker ” (GAO 1992). These were not minor details but crucial pieces 
that were missing that could seriously delay sales and acquisitions. However, the report did 
note that the corporation had been in the process of rolling out a “data integrity program” 
but that persistent errors in an estimated 37% of REOMS records still existed (GAO 1993a). 
The RTC’s Ass et Manager System  (AMS), which tracked income and expense data for 
contractors, as well as automated payments to the m, also saw its fair share of criticism, 
centering on the calculation of fees, transferring data effectively, and validating correct 
payment amounts to contractors (GAO 1992). 
Because of the lack of data, GAO reported that the RTC’s sales evaluation methods were weak. 
Much of the data the RTC used in evaluating SAMDA contract-driven disposition versus RTC-
run auction sales came from the aforementioned problematic information systems. In fact, 
the RTC did not, at the time of the report, have a standard reporting schedule for its 
contractors, meaning that data like contracting fees, revenues, and expenses were not made 
available to the corporation because “some field offices [did] not require reporting until 
assets [were] sold” (GAO 1993 a). Even certain key financial elements, such as operating 
income and expenses, were excluded from the RTC’s own analysis (GAO 1993a).28 
Asset Dispositions. Finally, GAO’s report identified a conflict between one of RTC’s mandates 
and its asset disposition behavior. FIRREA statutes specifically state d that the RTC must 
maximize the net present value of the return of any asset disposition efforts  (US Congress 
1989, sec. 501) . However, this requirement was called into question as the corporation 
appeared to be emphasizing balance sheet reduction. Four DC metro area regional auctions 
were used as an example of instances where RTC staff, “failed to provide potential buyers 
complete and accurate asset information, allow adequate time to ev aluate assets, and 
properly prepare assets for sale. These planning and management inadequacies caused 
delays in closing, cancellations of contracts, and lower recoveries” (GAO 1993a). While put-
option clauses would have, in theory, had the potential to alleviate some of these issues, their 
lengthy return window  and high return rates meant that there were still valid concerns.  
These issues very clearly ran contrary to the RTC’s NPV maximization mandate, as well as 
the one that specifically mentioned minimizing the effects of asset disposition efforts on local 
real estate markets (US Congress 1989, sec. 501). 
These concerns were also raised in Congress, as the RTC also obtain ed significant feedback 
from a number of businesspeople and policy experts such as Irvine Sprag ue, former  
chairman of the FDIC, Thomas Bennett Jr, executive vice president of Stillwater National 
Bank and Trust, and others (RTC Task Force 1990b). Much of their concern in 1989 and 1990 
was that the corporation would be too quick to “d ump” bad assets into distressed local real 
estate and financial markets (FDIC 19 98). The desire to return assets quickly to local  
investors was prevalent as well, as the RTC was a massive player in many of these local 
markets despite being more of a liquidator than an active participant (RTC Task Force 
1990b). 
Certain publications, such as the Orange County Register, assailed the RTC about the practice 
of, in some cases, keeping executives of failed thrifts onboard and paid without any specific 
duties (RTC Task Force 1990 b). The RTC’s annual reports had a section and data available 
that detailed the executive compensation schedules both pre- and postconservatorship, and 
 
28  Additional variables that were not included were property management expenses and litigation and 
foreclosure expenses. See GAO 1993a, 20, for more information. 
157
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 32 ---
the then–chairman of the corporation, William Seidman, made clear that any incidents of this 
nature were not intentional and would be rectified (RTC Task Force 1990b). 
Additionally, the RTC Completion Act of 1993 put more string ent requirements on the RTC 
with respect to the disposition of larger assets. Post RTCCA, the corporation was required to 
assign management and disposition authority to a “qualified entity ,” which would then “(1) 
analyze each asset and consider alternative disposition strategies, (2) develop a written 
management and disposition plan for the asset, and (3) implement this plan for a reasonable 
period of time . . .” (US Congress 1993).29 
Lea and Thyge rson (1994) developed a net present value -optimizing model  of the RTC’s 
asset disposition efforts to determine the optimal method for selling various classes of assets 
(e.g., liquid versus illiquid). Because the pace of the RTC’s sales was quite slow initi ally, the 
corporation disposed of assets much more rapidly despite their objectives to maximize 
revenue and minimize disruption to markets (among others). The authors find that liquid 
assets and retail deposit franchises should have been  sold as quickly as  possible, while 
illiquid but performing assets were good candidates for securitization , and nonperforming 
illiquid assets were good candidates for equity partnerships. The authors also recommended 
that the RTC cease put-option sales, as they allowed buyers to be too selective. Adding a put 
fee, the authors stated, would not be viable either, as pricing the option would be complex. 
Market Conditions. In addition to potential bidders being exceptionally wary of the assets 
of these distressed institutions, the RTC was also warned about “dumping“ huge amounts of 
distressed assets into local real estate markets  (FDIC 1998). In many real estate markets, 
such as Oklahoma’s, the RTC was the largest financial institution and often owned the most 
real estate assets. This exacerbated the concern about the RTC liquidating its assets too soon, 
particularly if there weren’t enough buyers to satisfy demand. This was a common concern 
in the early days of the crisis as real estate values continued to plunge amidst the  RTC’s 
disposition efforts. Some suggested that the RTC ought to break up its huge pools of 
performing loans into smaller ones so that local and community banks could purchase them 
(RTC Task Force 1990a). The RTC, in 1990, addressed these concerns by breaking up its asset 
pools and encouraging more regionally based sales and loan auctions  so that smaller and 
more local bidders could more easily participate. 
Despite these assertions that the RTC was too quick to sell assets and was engaging in “fire 
sale” practices, later analysis has suggested that the acquirers of thrifts or assets did not see 
dramatic bumps in their stock prices following the announce ment of acquisition  (Nanda, 
Owers, and Rogers 199 7). The opposite effect, in some cases, has been  found to be true, 
where institutions that were counterparties in whole -thrift P&A, mutual institution, and 
Western property transactions saw “persistently negative abnormal returns ” (Nand a, 
Owers, and Rogers 1997).  
The RTC’s pricing was further discussed by Nanda, Owers, and Rogers (1997), as some of its 
sales to publicly traded acquirers were given out at what some considered to be discounted 
prices and may have boosted their stock price performance. However, the authors find that 
there was no significant increase in the performance of winning bidders. Meta -analysis by 
Gupta and Misra (199 9) find this relationship generally holds across the li terature, with 
some caveats (summarized below). In some cases, the authors document small but negative 
announcement effects for some acquiring thrifts early in the crisis. Acquisitions facilitated 
 
29 The RTC was required to undertake these additional steps for real property with a book value of greater than 
$400,000 and nonperforming real estate assets that had a book value of $1 million. See GAO 1995b, 11–12, for 
more information. 
158
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 33 ---
by FSLIC prior to the establishment of the RTC , however, di d produce significant positive 
returns for acquirers, potentially indicating that changes in resolution practices instituted 
by FIRREA reduced taxpayer costs. Finally, acquirers of thrifts resolved under the ARP 
experienced some slightly positive increases  in performance, while non-ARP acquirers saw 
no performance increases. 
Contracting Issues. As a new agency handling hundreds of billions of dollars in troubled 
asserts, the RTC  heavily relied on outside contracting and private  sector expertise , much 
more so than the FDIC, which was also resolving other troubled institutions at the time (FDIC 
1998). While the RTC had a decentralized organizational structure with multiple regional  
and consolidated offices spread throughout the US, the organization was never staffed fully 
and was thus not able to be a proper administrator for these contractors. Any contractor 
whose annual fees amounted to more than $50,000 was required to undergo a background 
check, and five contractors in a sample of 30 of the RTC’s top 100 contractors had not done 
this (GAO 1993c).30 Fees for subcontractors under SAMDA contracts, on average, were five 
times as much as the fees paid by the RTC to the SAMDA contractors themselves (FDIC 1998). 
To alleviate some of these contracting concerns, the RTC created three new contracting 
compliance positions and adopted a Competition Advocate Program to ensure contractors 
were fairly competing against one anothe r. However, at the time of the report , more than 
25,000 contracts had  already been issued, and only 13 people were given the task of 
monitoring both outstanding contracts and the dozens of new ones that were being created  
(GAO 1993a). 
RTC Improvements. Many of the GAO’s reports were authored from 1991 to 1993, and thus 
gave the RTC multiple opportunities to manage its administrative, informational, and 
financial shortcomings more effectively . In total, GAO identified 21 major reforms that fit 
into four broad categories: (1) general management functions, (2) resolution and disposition 
activities, (3) contracting (including MWOB s) activities, and (4) Oversight Board reform  
(GAO 1995 a, 2 2–23). In its final analysis of RTC’s progress on implementing these 
management reforms, GAO reported that, of the 21, only two were still works in progress, 
while the rest had either been completed or had had action taken (GAO 1995a). 
Another GAO report, released in May 1995, suggested that the RTC had made significant  
improvements in several areas. GAO found that sales methods that involved the corporation 
maintaining a residual ownership role in the assets  was vital to clearing its remaining 
inventory, much of wh ich comprised hard -to-sell assets.  Contract issuance decreased by 
51% in the first six months of 1994 compared to the first six months of 1991, partially due 
to a diminishing asset portfolio as well as more stringent oversight. Assets under contractor 
management also decreased by 76 %. Tighter internal controls —such as more robust 
auditing procedures and adopting data quality plans to obtain critical data elements for 
assets in its 17 major systems —were some of the ways the RTC tackled some of  these 
criticisms (GAO 1995b). In light of these continued changes, the GAO removed the RTC from 
its high-risk list in its February 1995 High-Risk Series report (GAO 1995a). 
Many of t he RTC’s problems stemmed from inadequate predevelopment at the time of i ts 
inception and the monumental task of resolving a huge portion of a severely stressed savings 
and loan industry within a few short years. However, the corporation, spurred on by GAO 
recommendations and key pieces of legislation like RTCRRIA and RTCCA, was able to work 
toward, and make, improvements in several key areas. 
 
30 These contractors had average annual fees ranging from $6 million to $34 million  each. 
159
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 34 ---
The RTC also conducted an analysis of its disposition of hard -to-sell assets in 1992, as this 
had become a top priority for corporation leadership. The report reviewed the response of 
market participants to the RTC’s sales strategies, identified issues that were inhibiting the 
hard-to-sell asset disposition process, and analyzed the net returns to the corporation from 
certain disposition methods. The RTC ultimately had the following recommendations: 
• Emphasize the sale of assets in portfolios rather than in individual asset transactions, 
• Design product packages that were tailored to all markets, 
• Sell products through both established and innovative sales strategies, 
• Emphasize the importance of early and thorough due diligence, and 
• Provide consistent and reliable postsettlement information for all  sales strategies 
(GAO 1993d). 
The RTC also found that using multiple sales strategies attracted a larger and more diverse 
group of potential buyers, thereby increasing competition and overall returns. The 
corporation’s analysis also showed that the range of projected net recoveries for SAMDA 
sales was lower than for direct sales and auctions. While the findings in this report were 
useful in providing additional guidance on future hard -to-sell disposition efforts, a GAO 
analysis of the report urged a cautio us interpretation of some of the RTC’s data, as some of 
it—namely the data used to measure the results of its disposition strategies —was too 
incomplete and limited (GAO 1993d). 
Selection Bias. In an analysis of the costs of FDIC resolutions and liquidation s during the 
early years of crisis (1986–1991), Bennett and Unal (2014) find that, while FDIC resolutions 
appeared to have been more cost-efficient than liquidations, the characteristics of the banks 
that were being resolved or liquidated were a much more significant determinant of costs. 
Generally, banks that had greater franchise value and were healthier relative to others were 
selected for private  sector reorganization, while less healthy ones were liquidated. When 
controlling for these aspects, they find that there were no cost differences between the two 
methods during this period. This is surprising, as “private -sector reorga nizations include 
premium payments to the FDIC for the franchise value of the deposits they assume. However, 
in FDIC liquidations the franchise value is destroyed” (Bennett and Unal 2014). This finding 
is key because it implies that there were significantly higher inherent costs to the FDIC for 
private sector reorganization. However, liquidation was found to be less cost -effective even 
after controlling for institutional characteristics in the period of 1992 –2007, one where 
significantly less stress was observed. 
While the findings in th is paper explicitly discusses FDIC resolutions during and after the 
S&L crisis, this same phenomenon may have affected cost estimates for RTC resolutions, as 
well. As discussed in earlier sections, P&As (and the ARP) appear to have been less costly, on 
average, but these figures do not take into account the financial condition of the thrift being 
resolved. For example, the reason the RTC sustained such heavy losses early in the crisis was 
not that the corporation chose to use deposit transfers and payoffs in lieu of P&As but that 
the thrifts that needed assistance early on were far worse off financially than those that failed 
later. This was especially true for the firms that were placed under conservatorship by FSLIC 
but were unable to be resolved due to its insolvency. 
Costs to the Public. Even the total cost estimates of the crisis vary dramatically, as Curry and 
Shibut (2000) discuss. Initially, expected loss estimates hovered around $30  billion to $50 
billion, but some nongovernment experts estimate s are closer to $100 billion. The Bush Sr. 
160
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 35 ---
administration estimated that approximately 400 thrifts with more than  $200 billion in 
assets would need to be managed by the RTC, with estimated costs of about $50 billion. These 
initial estimates were the basis for the original funding level of the RTC. 
The massive discrepancies between estimated and actual failures were due to several key 
factors, the authors write. First, the available data—especially during the earlier years—was 
either inaccurate or completely lacking. Thrift supervision had been lax and examinations 
infrequent. The data that was available was based on relaxed  accounting standards that 
obscured the true financial conditions of many of the firms. Second, a changing economy 
made it very difficult to properly estimate the expected number of thrift failures. Because the 
design of the RTC was, in  part, based on these expectations, the corporation was not 
prepared, and its leadership had little political capital to return to Congress and admit they 
made a big mistake  (Curry and Shibut 200 0). One may recall the tremendous difficulty in  
getting the RTC operational in the first place. 
Third, the projections are subject to considerable methodological variance. Some estimates 
include both projected RTC losses as well as pas t FSLIC ones; while others include both but 
exclude losses sustained by the thrift industry , instead focusing only on taxpayer losses. 
Additionally, estimates sometimes include financing costs from the billions of dollars in debt 
instruments issued to fund the response. A total of $38.3 billion of FICO and REFCORP bonds 
were purchased by private investors, and an additional $99 billion was purchased by the 
government, which itself had to borrow funds (Curry and Shibut 2000). Some cost estimates 
include not just the amount borrowed but interest costs for up to 30 to 40 years for some or 
all of the debt issuances. 
Including all of the costs of borrowing could very well double or triple cost estimates. For 
example, the GAO estimated that total interest expenses to taxpayers for FICO and REFCORP 
bonds would be $76.2 billion, and total estimated interest expenses for appropriations ( i.e., 
Treasury borrowings) was about $209 billion (GAO 1996). The authors stated that adding 
interest payments to the amount borrowed would overstate costs, as, in present value terms, 
the amount borrowed is equal to the sum of interest payments and debt repayment. The 
federal government does add interest payments to the amount borrowed when calculating 
the taxpayer costs of other programs.  These factors have caused cost estimates to va ry 
widely, which makes it difficult to get a proper handle on the size and scope of both the crisis 
and what was needed to respond to it. 
IV. References 
Adams, Dirk S., Rodney R. Peck, and Jill W. Spencer. 1992. “Firrea and the New Federal Home 
Loan Bank System.” Santa Clara Law Review 32, no. 1: 17–62.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/firrea-and-new-federal-home-loan-bank-system. 
Basle Committee on Banking Supervision  (BCBS). 1988.  “International Convergence of 
Capital Measurement and Capital Standards.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/international-convergence-capital-measurement-and-
capital-standards-0. 
Bennett, Rosalind L., and Haluk Unal. 2014. “The Effects of Resolution Methods and Industry 
Stress on the Loss on Assets from Bank Failures.” FDIC Center for Financial Research 
Working Paper No. 2009-11, July 2014.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/effects-resolution-methods-and-industry-stress-loss-
assets-bank-failures. 
161
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 36 ---
Cull, Robert, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Jeanne Verrier. 2018. “Bank Ownership: 
Trends and Implications.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 8297, January 
2018.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-ownership-trends-and-implications. 
Curry, Timothy, and Lynn Shibut. 2000. “The Cost of the Savings and Loan Crisis: Truth and  
Consequences.” FDIC Banking Review 13, no. 2: 26–33.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/cost-savings-and-loan-crisis-truth-and-consequences. 
Davison, Lee. 2005. “Politics and Policy: The Creation of the Resolution Trust Corporation.”  
FDIC Banking Review 17, no. 2: 17–40.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/politics-and-policy-creation-resolution-trust-
corporation. 
———. 2006a. “The Resolution Trust Corporation and Congress, 1989 –1993. Part I: 1989–
1990.” FDIC Banking Review 18, no. 2: 38–60.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/resolution-trust-corporation-and-congress-1989-1993-
part-i-1989-1990. 
———. 2006b. “The Resolution Trust Corporation and Congress, 1989–1993. Part II: 1991–
1993.” FDIC Banking Review 18, no. 3: 1–30.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/resolution-trust-corporation-and-congress-1989-1993-
part-ii-1991-1993. 
Dowd, Maureen. 1989. “ Bush Savings Plan Calls for Sharing the Cost Broadly; Big Sale of 
Bonds.” New York Times, February 7, 1989.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bush-savings-plan-calls-sharing-cost-broadly-big-sale-
bonds. 
Effros, Robert C. , ed.  1997. Current Legal Issues Affecting Central Banks, Volume IV.  
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, March 1997.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/current-legal-issues-affecting-central-banks-volume-iv. 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 1998. Managing the Crisis: The FDIC and RTC 
Experience, 1980–1994.  Washington, DC: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation , August 
1998.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/managing-crisis-fdic-and-rtc-experience-volume-one. 
———. 2000. FDIC Banking Review 13, no. 2. 
———. 2018. Managing the Cris is: The FDIC and RTC Experienc e–Chronological Overview . 
Washington, DC: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, January 2018.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/managing-crisis-fdic-and-rtc-experience-chronological-
overview. 
———. 2019. “Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Resolutions Handbook.” January 15, 
2019.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-deposit-insurance-corporation-resolutions-
handbook. 
Federal Housing Finance Agency ( FHFA). 2011. “FHFA Announces Completion of RefCorp 
Obligation and Approves FHLB Plans to Build Capital.” Press release, August 5, 2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/fhfa-announces-completion-refcorp-obligation-and-
approves-fhlb-plans-build-capital. 
162
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 37 ---
Federal Register (FR). 1989. “Department of the Treasury – Office of Thrift Supervision : 12 
CFR Parts 561, 583, and 567.” Federal Register 54, no. 215 (November 8).   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-register-vol-54-no-215. 
Garcia, Gillian. 2013. “Garn-St Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982.” Federal Reserve 
History, November 22, 2013.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/garn-st-germain-depository-institutions-act-1982. 
General Accounting Office (GAO). 1989. “ The Budgetary Treatment of the Proposed 
Resolution Funding Corporation (REFCORP).” Statement of Charles A. Bowsher Comptroller 
General of the United States, before the Task Force on Urgent Fiscal Issues, Committee on 
Budget, US House of Representatives, May 19, 1989.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/budgetary-treatment-proposed-resolution-funding-
corporation-refcorp. 
———. 1991. “ RTC: Financial Audit –Resolution Funding Corporation’s 1989 Financial 
Statements.” Report to Congress, April 2, 1991.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-financial-audit-resolution-funding-corporations-
1989-financial-statements. 
———. 1992. “RTC: Asset Manage ment Systems.” Report to the Resolution Trust 
Corporation, October 28, 1992.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-asset-management-systems. 
———. 1993a. “RTC: Funding, Organization, and Performance.”  Testimony before the 
Subcommittee on Financial Institut ions Supervision, Regulation and Deposit Insurance, 
Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, US House of Representatives, March 18, 
1993.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-funding-organization-and-performance. 
———. 1993b. “RTC: Status of Minority and Women Outreach and Contracting Program.”  
Report to the Chairman, Committee on Government Operations, US House of 
Representatives, May 19, 1993.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-status-minority-and-women-outreach-and-
contracting-program. 
———. 1993c. “RTC: Better Assurance Needed That Contractors Meet Fitness and Integrity 
Standards.” Report to Congressional Requesters, July 26, 1993.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-better-assurance-needed-contractors-meet-fitness-
and-integrity-standards. 
———. 1993d. “RTC: Data Limitations Impaired Analysis of Sales Methods.”  Report to the 
Honorable Bruce F. Vento, US House of Representatives, September 27, 1993.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-data-limitations-impaired-analysis-sales-methods. 
———. 1995a. “RTC: Implementation of the Management Reforms in the RTC Completion 
Act.” Report to Congressional Committees, March 9, 1995.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-implementation-management-reforms-rtc-
completion-act. 
———. 1995b. “RTC: Efforts Under Way to Address Management Weaknesses.”  Report to 
the Deputy and Acting Chief Executive Officer, Resolution Trust Corporation, May 12, 1995.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-efforts-under-way-address-management-
weaknesses. 
163
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 38 ---
———. 1996. “RTC: Financial Audit – Resolution Trust Corporation’s 1995 and 1994 
Financial Statements .” Report to the Congress, July 1996. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-audit-resolution-trust-corporations-1995-and-
1994-financial-statements. 
Gupta, Atul, and Lalatendu Misra. 1999. “Failure and Failure Resolution in the US Thrift and 
Banking Industries.” Financial Management 28, no. 4 (Winter): 87–105.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/failure-and-failure-resolution-us-thrift-and-banking-
industries. 
Lea, Michael, and Kenneth J. Thygerson. 1994. “A Model of the Asset Disposition Decision of 
the RTC.” Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association  22, no. 1  
(Spring): 117–133.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/model-asset-disposition-decision-rtc. 
Moreland-Gunn, Penelope, Peter J. Elmer, and Timothy J. Curry. 1996. “Reps and Warranties.” 
FDIC Banking Review 8, no. 3, art. 1 (February).  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/reps-and-warranties-fdic-banking-review-1996-vol-8-
no-3-article-i-federal-deposit-insurance. 
Moysich, Alane. 1997. “The Mutual Savings Bank Crisis.” In History of the Eighties: Lessons for 
the Future. Vol. 1, An Examination of the Banking Crises of the 1980s and Early 1990s , edited 
by George Hanc, 167–88. Washington, DC: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/history-eighties-lessons-future-vol-1-examination-
banking-crises-1980s-and-early-1990s. 
Nanda, Sudhir, James E. Owers, and Ronald C. Rogers. 1997. “An Analysis of Resolution Trust 
Corporation Transactions: Auction Market Process and Pricing.”  Real Estate Economics  25, 
no. 2: 271–94.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/analysis-resolution-trust-corporation-transactions-
auction-market-process-and-pricing. 
National Commission on Financ ial Institution Reform, Recovery and Enforcement  
(NCFIRRE). 1993. Origins and Causes of the S&L Debacle: A Blueprint for Reform . A Report to 
the President and Congress of the United States, Washington, DC: The Commission, July 
1993.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/origins-and-causes-sl-debacle-blueprint-reform. 
Resolution Trust Corporation  (RTC). 1991. “ Annual Report of the Resolution Trust 
Corporation–1989.” May 15, 1991.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1989. 
———. 1992. “Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1991.” June 30, 1992.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1991. 
———. 1995a. Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1994.” August 31, 1995. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1994. 
———. 1995b. Resolution Trust Corporation Statistical Abstract: August 1989/September 
1995. Washington, DC: RTC Office of Planning, Research, and Statistics. 
———. 1996. “Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation –1995.” August 29, 1996. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1995. 
164
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 39 ---
Robinson, Kenneth J. 2013a. “Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act 
of 1980.” Federal Reserve History, November 22, 2013.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/depository-institutions-deregulation-and-monetary-
control-act-1980. 
———. 2013b. “Savings and Loan Crisis: 1980 -1989” Federal Reserve History, November 
22, 2013.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/savings-and-loan-crisis-1980-1989. 
RTC Task Force. 1990a. “Disposition of Assets by the RTC.” Hearing before the Subcommittee 
on Financial Institutions Supervi sion, Regulation, and Insurance , Committee on Banking, 
Finance, and Urban Affairs, US House of Representatives, One Hundred First Congress, 
Second Session, May 4, 1990.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/serial-no-101-122-disposition-assets-rtc-hearing-
subcommittee-financial-institutions. 
———. 1990b. “Semiannual Report and Appearance by the Oversight Board of the 
Resolution Trust Corporation .” Hearing before the Committee on Banking, Finance, and 
Urban Affairs, US House of Representatives, One Hundred First Congress, Second Session, 
June 14, 1990.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/semiannual-report-and-appearance-oversight-board-
resolution-trust-corporation-hearing. 
———. 1992. “Resolution Trust Corporation Refinancing and Restructuring Issues.” 
Hearings before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions Supervision, Regulation and 
Insurance, Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, US House of Representatives, 
One Hundred Second Congress, First Session, September 12 and 17, 1991.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/serial-no-102-70-resolution-trust-corporation-
refinancing-and-restructuring-issues-hearing. 
Shorter, Gary. 2008. “The Resolution Trust Corporation: Historical Analysis.” Congres sional 
Research Service, Report for Congress, RS 22959, September 26, 2008. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/resolution-trust-corporation-historical-analysis. 
US Congress. 1987. “Public Law No: 100-86–Competitive Equality and Banking Act of 1987.” 
August 10, 1987.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/competitive-equality-banking-act-1987. 
———. 1989. “Public Law No: 101 -73–Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
Enforcement Act of 1989.” August 9, 1989.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-101-73-financial-institutions-reform-
recovery-and-enforcement-act-1989. 
———. 1991a. “Public Law No: 102-18–Resolution Trust Corporation Funding Act of 1991.” 
March 23, 1991.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-102-18-resolution-trust-corporation-
funding-act-1991. 
———. 1991b. “Public Law No: 102 -233–Resolution Trust Corporation, Refinancing, 
Restructuring, and Improvement Act of 1991.” December 12, 1991.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-102-233-resolution-trust-corporation-
refinancing-restructuring-and. 
165
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 40 ---
———. 1993. “Public Law No: 103-204. 1993. “Resolution Trust Corporation Completion Act 
1993.” December 17, 1993.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-103-204-resolution-trust-corporation-
completion-act-1993. 
V. Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
Managing the Crisis: The FDIC and RTC Experience 1980 –1994 (FDIC 1998) 
Detailed overview of both the RTC and FDIC’s responses to the savings and loan crisis. 
Chronology and breakdown of methods.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/managing-crisis-fdic-and-rtc-experience-volume-one. 
Managing the Crisis: The FDIC and RTC Experience–Chronological Overview (FDIC 2018)   
FDIC overview of the savings and loan crisis broken down by year with significant events and 
statistics. Goes far beyond just 1989 –1995. Chapters 12 –18 cover those years, however.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/managing-crisis-fdic-and-rtc-experience-chronological-
overview. 
Public Law No: 101-73 (US Congress 1989)   
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989. The legislation that 
created the RTC.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-101-73-financial-institutions-reform-
recovery-and-enforcement-act-1989. 
Resolution Trust Corporation Statistical Abstract: August 1989/September 1995  (RTC 
1995b)  
Document presenting historical time series data from 1989 through September 1995, including 
resolution listings by state and institution.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-statistical-abstract-august-1989september-1995. 
Implementation Documents 
Public Law No: 101-73 (US Congress 1989)   
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989. The legislation that 
created the RTC.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-101-73-financial-institutions-reform-
recovery-and-enforcement-act-1989. 
Public Law No: 102-18 (US Congress 1991a)   
Resolution Trust Corporation Funding Act of 1991. Gave the RTC an additional $30 billion in 
funding.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-102-18-resolution-trust-corporation-
funding-act-1991. 
Public Law No: 102-233 (US Congress 1991b)   
Resolution Trust Corporation, Refinancing, Restructuring, and Improvement Act of 1991. Gave 
the RTC an additional $25 billion in funding and implemented broad oversight reforms for the 
institution.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-102-233-resolution-trust-corporation-
refinancing-restructuring-and. 
166
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 41 ---
Public Law No: 103-204 (US Congress 1993)   
Resolution Trust Corporation Completion Act 1993. Authorized the expired appropriation from 
the RTCRRIA of 1991 and moved the closing date of the RTC up by a year.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-no-103-204-resolution-trust-corporation-
completion-act-1993. 
Strategic Plan for the Resolution Trust Corporation (December 31, 1989)   
Draft of the RTC’s strategic plan, submitted to Congress as per its FIRREA mandate. Contains 
implementation procedures, comments, and policy discussion about var ious methods of 
disposition and resolution.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/strategic-plan-resolution-trust-corporation. 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
Appendix A: Enforcement Actions – Section 080 (July 2008)   
A set of prompt corrective actions set forth by the OTS regulating the operation of 
undercapitalized associations. This version has since been rescinded.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/appendix-enforcement-actions-section-080. 
Effectiveness of RTC Regulations after RTC Termination (December 22, 1995)   
A final rule drafted by the FDIC and RTC that elaborates on the status of current programs 
subsequent to the RTC’s dissolution. Only the Affordable Housing Disposition Program would 
continue to be active.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/effectiveness-rtc-regulations-after-rtc-termination. 
FDIC Resolutions Handbook (FDIC 2019)   
A detailed description of the FDIC’s experiences resolving failed institutions, including lessons 
learned and historical resolution alternatives.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-deposit-insurance-corporation-resolutions-
handbook. 
FDIC Risk Management Manual of Examination Policies – Sec. 3.6 – Other Real Estate (2012) 
An official manual published by the FDIC that details the operational and regulatory treatment 
of ‘Other Real Estate’ held by banks.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/fdic-risk-management-manual-examination-policies-
sec-36-other-real-estate. 
Federal Register Vol. 54, no. 215 (FR 1989)   
Government document published daily providing a uniform system for publicizing regulations 
and legal notices issued by federal agencies.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-register-vol-54-no-215. 
Public Law No: 100-86 (US Congress 1987)   
Competitive Equality and Banking Act of 1987. This legislation created the Financing 
Corporation (FICO) , helped regulate nonbanks financial institutions, allow ed emergency 
interstate banking acquisitions, and more.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/competitive-equality-banking-act-1987. 
Media Stories 
Bush Savings Plan Calls for Sharing the Cost Broadly; Big Sale of Bonds (Dowd 1989)   
A New York Times article announcing the Bush administration’s 1989 rescue plan to restore 
the deposit insurance system and, in particular, the savings and loan industry.   
167
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 42 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bush-savings-plan-calls-sharing-cost-broadly-big-sale-
bonds. 
Key Academic Papers 
An Analysis of Resolution Trust Corporation Transactions: Auction Market Process and 
Pricing (Nanda, Owers, and Rogers 1997)   
An academic pa per published in Real Estate Economics that argues winning bidders rarely 
benefited from stock price gains when acquiring assets from the RTC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/analysis-resolution-trust-corporation-transactions-
auction-market-process-and-pricing. 
The Cost of the Savings and Loan Crisis: Truth and Consequences  (Curry and Shibut 2000)   
FDIC Banking Review  paper that provides a cost breakdown of both the now -defunct FSLIC 
and the RTC over the course of the S&L crisis. Examines the cost to taxpayers and the private 
sector.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/cost-savings-and-loan-crisis-truth-and-consequences. 
The Effects of Res olution Methods and Industry Stress on the Loss on Assets from Bank 
Failures (Bennett and Unal 2014)   
Academic paper examining the costs of resolving bank failures and comparing those involved 
in FDIC liquidations versus private sector resolutions.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/effects-resolution-methods-and-industry-stress-loss-
assets-bank-failures. 
Failure and Failure Resolution in the US Thrift and Banking Industries  (Gupta and Misra 
1999)   
Academic paper surveying recent academic and regulatory case studies on the causes of the 
S&L crisis of the 1980s and 1990s.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/failure-and-failure-resolution-us-thrift-and-banking-
indu. 
Firrea and the New Federal Home Loan  Bank System  (Adams, Peck, and Spencer 1992) 
A law review article examining the impact of FIRREA on the banking system, with particular 
focus on modifications made to corporate governance.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/firrea-and-new-federal-home-loan-bank-system. 
A Model of the Asset Disposition Decision of the RTC (Lea and Thygerson 1994)   
Research paper analyzing the development of asset disposition models for the RTC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/model-asset-disposition-decision-rtc. 
Reps and Warranties (Moreland-Gunn, Elmer, and Curry 1996)   
An article published by the FDIC that analyzes the RTC’s claims and experience with R&Ws.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/reps-and-warranties-fdic-banking-review-1996-vol-8-
no-3-article-i-federal-deposit-insurance. 
Reports/Assessments 
Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1989 (RTC 1991)   
The RTC’s annual report from 1989. Contains detailed financial statements and breakdowns on 
each division of the corporation.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1989. 
168
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 43 ---
Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1990 (October 15, 1991)   
The RTC’s annual report from 1990. Contains detailed financial statements and breakdowns on 
each division of the corporation.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1990. 
Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1991 (RTC 1992)   
The RTC’s annual report from 1991. Contains detailed financial statements and breakdowns on 
each division of the corporation.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1991. 
Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1992 (October 29, 1993)   
The RTC’s annual report from 1992. Contains detailed financial statements and breakdowns on 
each division of the corporation.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1992. 
Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1993 (September 30, 1994)   
The RTC’s annual report from 1993. Contains detailed financial statements and breakdowns on 
each division of the corporation.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1993. 
Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1994 (RTC 1995)   
The RTC’s annual report from 1994. Contains detailed financial statements and breakdowns on 
each division of the corporation.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1994. 
Annual Report of the Resolution Trust Corporation–1995 (RTC 1996)   
The RTC’s annual report from 1995. Contains detailed financial statements and breakdowns on 
each division of the corporation.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-resolution-trust-corporation-1995. 
The Cost of the Savings and Loan Crisis: Trut h and Consequences (Curry and Shibut 2000)   
FDIC Banking Review  paper that provides a cost breakdown of both the now -defunct FSLIC 
and the RTC over the course of the S&L crisis. Examines the cost to taxpayers and the private 
sector.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/cost-savings-and-loan-crisis-truth-and-consequences. 
Disposition of Assets by the RTC (RTC Task Force 1990a)  
Testimony presented to Congress on the RTC’s plan for the continued disposition of assets .  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/serial-no-101-122-disposition-assets-rtc-hearing-
subcommittee-financial-institutions. 
FDIC Banking Review, Volume 13, No. 2 (FDIC 2000)   
A retrospective collection of essays by on the history of—and lessons learned from—the FDIC’s 
experience dealing with the S&L crisis.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-deposit-insurance-corporation-banking-review-
volume-13-no-2. 
FDIC Resolution Tasks and Approaches: A Comparison of the 1980 to 1994 and 2008 to 2013 
Crises (July 2020)   
Report comparing and assessing FDIC -insured banks’ failures and the FDIC’s response during 
each crisis.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/fdic-resolution-tasks-and-approaches-comparison-
1980-1994-and-2008-2013-crises. 
169
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 44 ---
Lessons Learned: Obtaining Value from Federal Asset Sales (March 2003)   
Research paper analyzing four case studies during which the government ha d valued assets, 
including the RTC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lessons-learned-obtaining-value-federal-asset-sales. 
The Mutual Savings Bank Crisis (Moysich 1997)  
A chapter from History of the Eighties: Lessons for the Future. Vol. 1, An Examination of the 
Banking Crises of the 1980s and Early 1990s that details the S&L debacle and its relationship 
with other banking crises of the decade.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/history-eighties-lessons-future-vol-1-examination-
banking-crises-1980s-and-early-1990s. 
Origins and Causes of the S&L Debacle: A Blueprint for Reform (NCFIRRE 1993)   
A report to the president and Congress of the United States detailing a blueprint of 
recommendations for financial reforms in the wake of the S&L crisis.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/origins-and-causes-sl-debacle-blueprint-reform. 
Politics and Policy: The Creation of the Resolution Trust Corporation (Davison 2005)  
Chronicles the political side of the development of the Resolution Trust Corporation, with 
specific emphasis on political economy concerns.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/politics-and-policy-creation-resolution-trust-
corporation. 
Recovery Ratios in the Savings and Loan Crisis: Evidence from the Resolution Trust 
Corporation’s Sale of Bank-Owned Real Estate (2014)   
Analysis of Owned Real Estate by the RTC, with suggestions to help increase recovery ratios for 
future ORE programs.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/recovery-ratios-savings-and-loan-crisis-evidence-
resolution-trust-corporations-sale-bank. 
The Resolution Trust Corporation and Congress, 1989 –1993: Part I: 1989 –1990 (Davison 
2006a)  
Longer-form discussion of the congressional impact on the development of the Resolution Trust 
Corporation.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/resolution-trust-corporation-and-congress-1989-1993-
part-i-1989-1990. 
The Resolution Trust Corporation and Congress, 1989 –1993. Part II: 1991 –1993 (Davison 
2006b) 
Summary report on the congressional intersection that the R TC had, with specific analysis o f 
the three pieces of legislation from 1991 to 1993 that definitively impacted its structure.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/resolution-trust-corporation-and-congress-1989-1993-
part-ii-1991-1993 
The Resolution Trust Corporation: Historical Analysis (Shorter 2008)  
CRS Report by Gary Shorter, a specialist in financial economics, that gives a broad, historical 
analysis of the RTC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/resolution-trust-corporation-historical-analysis. 
RTC: Asset Management Systems (GAO 1992)  
GAO report by Howard Rhile, director of General Government Information Systems, which 
centers on concerns stemming from RTC’s accounting and asset management systems. Specifies 
a lack of necessary data and slower sales processes because of this.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-asset-management-systems. 
170
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 45 ---
RTC: Better Assurance Needed That Contractors Meet Fitness and Integrity Standards (GAO 
1993c)   
GAO report by Gaston Gianni, associate director of Government Business Operations Issues. 
Report highlights several major weaknesses in the RTC’s contracting program.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-better-assurance-needed-contractors-meet-fitness-
and-integrity-standards. 
RTC: Efforts Under Way to Address Management Weaknesses (GAO 1995b)   
GAO report by Gaston Gianni that  details the increased effort that the RTC ha d been putting 
forth to address issues expressed in previous reports. Specifics are around contracting oversight 
and mandate adherence, for instance.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-efforts-under-way-address-management-
weaknesses. 
RTC: Financial Audit – Resolution Trust Corporation’s 1995 and 1994 Financial Statements 
(GAO 1996)  
An official GAO audit of the RTC’s operations during 1994 and 1995. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-audit-resolution-trust-corporations-1995-and-
1994-financial-statements. 
 
RTC: Funding, Organization, and Performance (GAO 1993a)  
GAO congressional testimony  by the comptroller general expressing the need for continued 
funding in order to continue the pace of its disposal. Additional criticism about RTC contracting 
procedures and asset disposition strategies.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-funding-organization-and-performance. 
RTC: Implementation of the Management Reforms in the R TC Completion Act (GAO 1995a) 
The second of two required GAO reports detailing the RTC’s progress toward the 
implementation of 21 management reforms mandated by the RTC Completion Act of 1993.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-implementation-management-reforms-rtc-
completion-act. 
RTC: Western Storm Investigation and Related Contracting Deficiencies (August 6, 1992)  
GAO report by Gaston Gianni that analyzes the RTC’s handling of Operation “Western Storm” 
while presenting new contracting issues.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rtc-western-storm-investigation-and-related-
contracting-deficiencies. 
 
VI. Appendixes 
Appendix A: Characteristics of SAMDA Contracts and Amendments 
Program Contracts Inception Date Types of Fees Fee Determination 
SAMDA I 160 August 1990 Management, 
disposition, and 
incentive fees 
Disposition and 
incentive fees tied to 
individual asset sales 
171
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 46 ---
SAMDA II 39 April 1991 Management, 
disposition, and 
incentive fees 
Disposition fees tied to 
performance of entire 
asset pool 
SAMA N/A January 1992 Management and 
incentive fees only 
N/A 
Total 199    
 
Source: FDIC 1998, 356. 
 
 
 
4
47
33
4 1 3
26
96
34
27
172
165
63
26
61
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
Straight Deposit Payoff
Insured Deposit Transfer
Purchase and Assumption
Appendix B: Resolution Methods by Year (1989–1995) 
Source: FDIC 1998, 120. 
172
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 47 ---
Appendix C: Details on RTC Thrift Failures (1989–1995, USD Billions) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: FDIC 1998, 115. 
173
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith

--- Page 48 ---
$51.08 
$20.84 
$10.77 
$4.18 
$0.61 $0.02 $0.06 
$0.00
$10.00
$20.00
$30.00
$40.00
$50.00
$60.00
1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
Appendix D: Total RTC Losses (1989–1995, USD Billions) 
Source: FDIC 1998, 137. 
174
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 49 ---
Appendix E: RTC Conservatorships by Asset Size (1989–1995, USD Billions) 
 
Appendix F: RTC Staffing (1989–1995) 
Year RTC: Total Staff Percent Change (YoY) 
1989 1,516 N/A 
1990 4,899 223.15% 
1991 8,614 75.83% 
1992 7,382 –14.30% 
1993 6,778 –8.18% 
1994 5,899 –12.97% 
1995 2,067 –64.96% 
Source: FDIC 1998. 
 
Copyright 2019, 2021 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material 
or to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale 
Program on Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
 
Type Number Percentage of Total 
> $500 million 139 20% 
$100 to $500 million 274 39% 
< $100 million 293 41% 
Source: FDIC 1998, 116. 
175
US Resolution Trust Corporation Lawson and Engbith