--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 2 
2021 
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit/ Asset Management of Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit/ Asset Management of 
Credits Credits 
Ariel Smith 
Yale School of Management 
Sharon M. Nunn 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Smith, Ariel and Nunn, Sharon M. (2021) "Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit/ Asset Management 
of Credits," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 2, 381-409. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1190 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/20 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss2/20

--- Page 3 ---
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit/ 
Asset Management of Credits1 
Ariel A. Smith and Sharon M. Nunn2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
June 23, 2021 
Abstract 
In 1998, Indonesia’s banking sector was undercapitalized, under regulated , and suffering 
from an excess of nonperforming loans (NPLs). I n response, the Indonesian government 
devised the  Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency  (IBRA) and its  Asset Management 
Unit/Asset Management of Credits (AMU/AMC)  as part of a three -pronged government 
emergency plan, along with a blanket guarantee of the debts of all domestic banks and a 
framework for corporate restructuring . The AM U/AMC acquired and managed 
nonperforming loans from a variety of Indonesian banks and attempted to dispose of them. 
The AMU/AMC had acquired nearly IDR 400 trillion (approximately $86 billion) in face value 
of loans  by April 2003 . Throughout its history, the  organization encountered political 
interference, transfer issues, documentation problems, an d problems with legal authority 
that impeded its effective operation . Although the AMU/AMC was wound down on its 
initially scheduled end date of February 27, 2004, its functions and many unresolved legal 
cases were  simply shifted to a new asset management company under the Ministry of 
Finance. 
Keywords: Asian Financial Crisis, asset management, Indonesia, IBRA, nonperforming loans, 
loan restructuring  
 
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering broad-based asset management company programs. 
 
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
 
2 Research Associates, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
381

--- Page 4 ---
At a Glance  
In the years leading up to the Asian 
Financial Crisis of 1997, Indonesia n firms 
became increasingly reliant on short -term 
funding denominated in foreign currencies. 
Indonesia’s banks, moreover, were 
undercapitalized, poorly supervised, and 
engaged in heavy lending to affiliated 
companies and politically favored 
enterprises. Following the collapse of the 
Indonesian rupiah in mid-1997, the 
country’s banking system was in crisis. 
In early 1998, the government devised the 
Indonesian Ba nk Restructuring Agency  
(IBRA) and subsequently its Asset 
Management Unit/Asset Management o f 
Credits (AMU/AMC) as part of a three -
pronged emergency plan , along with a 
blanket guarantee of the debts of a ll 
domestic banks and a framework for 
corporate restructuring, to deal with 
problems in the Indonesian banking sector. 
Banks that came under IBRA’s umbrella 
would transfer nonperforming loans to the 
AMU/AMC at zero value, with any proceeds 
ultimately returned to the banks to be used 
in repaying government assistance . The 
organization disposed of loan assets 
according to size. AMU/AMC was belatedly 
empowered after creation with expanded 
legal powers and the ability to escalate 
actions taken against the largest defaulting borrowers, which included regularly publishing 
the names of recalcitrant debtors. 
The AMU/AMC ultimately acquired almost IDR 400 trillion (approximately $86 billion)  in 
face value of loans. It wound down on its initially scheduled end date of  February 27, 2004, 
but the organization’s functions and its many unresolved legal cases were simply shifted to 
a new asset management company under the Ministry of Finance. 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: Managing the most severe nonperforming 
loans from banks involved with IBRA 
Launch date Announcement date: 
January 27, 1998 
 
Operational date:  
Fall 1998 
  
Wind-down dates Disposal:  
February 27, 2004 
Size and type of NPL 
problem 
75% of total loans in 
1998 
Commercial; corporate 
Program size Not specified at outset 
Eligible institutions Banks participating in 
the country’s 
recapitalization 
program 
 
Closed- and open-bank 
Usage  Approximately IDR 400 
trillion in face value of 
loans by April 2003 
Outcomes Average recovery rate 
for assets between 1999 
and 2004 was 
approximately 25% 
Ownership structure Government-owned 
Notable features Indonesian officials 
vested IBRA with 
extrajudicial powers to 
seize assets of 
uncooperative debtors 
IBRA AMU/AMC 
382
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Summary Evaluation 
IBRA has been criticized for not being as effective at managing and recovering assets as it 
might have been due to a combination of factors , including political interference, transfer 
issues, documentation problems, and problems with legal authority.  The average recovery 
rate for assets between 1999 and 2004 was approximately 25%. 
  
383
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 6 ---
Indonesia’s IBRA, AMU/AMC: Indonesia Context 
GDP 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$226.40 billion in 1997 
$98.23 billion in 1998 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$1,064 in 1997 
$464 in 1998 
Sovereign credit rating (5-year senior debt) 
 
As of Q4, 1997: 
 
S&P Rating: BBB+ 
Fitch Rating: BBB+ 
 
As of Q4, 1998: 
 
S&P Rating: B- 
Fitch Rating: BB+ 
Size of banking system 
 
$105.50 billion in 1997 
$44.96 billion in 1998 
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
GDP 
 
46.60% in 1997 
45.77% in 1998 
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
financial system 
 
100% in 1997 
100% in 1998 
5-bank concentration of banking system 
 
48.98% in 1997 
60.27% in 1998 
Foreign involvement in banking system NA 
Government ownership of banking system 
 NA 
Existence of deposit insurance Yes 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; World 
Bank Deposit Insurance Dataset. 
384
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
Indonesia experienced a period of rapid growth in the years leading up to the Asian Financial 
Crisis of 1997, with GDP increasing by an average of 7% to 8% per year from 1970 to 1996. 
However, this period also witnessed the rapid liberalization of the Indonesian economy and 
banking sector without a corresponding adoption of necessary prudential standards . 
Indonesian businesses became increasingly dependent on short -term debt denominated in 
foreign currencies, and the country’s undercapitalized, poorly supervised ban ks were 
heavily exposed to weak corporate borrowers and a booming real estate market . Private 
banks lent extensively to  affiliated companies , and state-owned banks lent extensively to 
politically favored enterprises (Sharma 2001) . With the outbreak of the Asian Financial 
Crisis and Thailand’s decision to float the baht in July 1997 , the Indonesian rupiah  came 
under significant pressure. In August 1997, Indonesia floated the rupiah and its value fell by 
more than  30% in September and October ( Lindgren et  al. 1999). Foreign lenders began 
tightening credit, triggering a liquidity crunch that was then exacerbated when the central 
bank raised interest rates to shore up Indonesia’s currency (Djiwandono 2005). Indonesian 
firms and banks began experiencing difficulty servicing their foreign-currency-denominated 
debts (Sharma 2001). At the height of the crisis, approximately 75% of total loans in the 
Indonesian banking system were nonperforming (IMF Staff 2004). 
Faced with these pressures, o n October 31, 1997, the government came to a three -year 
stand-by agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) over policies it was 
prepared to implement in return for the IMF’s financial support. 3 These policies were built 
around three objectives: a strong macr oeconomic framework that combined substantial 
fiscal adjustment and a tight monetary stance; a strategy to restructure the financial sector, 
including the closure of insolvent banks; and broad structural measures to improve 
governance. Additionally, the go vernment committed to taking any additional measures 
necessary to achieve the policies’ objectives throughout the duration of the stand -by 
agreement (Muhammad and Djiwandono 1997). 
The bank restructuring program that the Indonesian government rolled out in response to 
its agreement with the IMF  covered 59 banks (representing 66 % of the banking sector’s 
assets)4 with graduated intervention measures. On November 1, 1997 , less than 24 hours 
 
3 The financial support provided was equivalent to Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 7.34 billion, or 490% of quota; 
in turn, this was equivalent to about $1 0 billion. Financing came from the IMF, along with quick -disbursing 
additional financing expected from the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and bilateral donors; the 
bulk of this financing would be made available during the first year of the program  (Muhammad and 
Djiwandono 1997). 
 
4 There is a numerical discrepancy between these numbers (Enoch 2000)  and those provided by Sharma 
(2001). Sharma writes that the agreement included 50 banks representing 34.3% of the banking system. 
Further, Lindgren et al. (1999) write that the resolution package covered 50 banks, representing 34.3% of the  
banking system.  The authors chose the Enoch (200 0) figure because it was written for the IMF  (whereas 
Sharma (2001) was not) and in a later year than Lindgren et al. (1999), another IMF source. 
385
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 8 ---
after the initial agreement with the IMF, the government immediately closed 16 small, clearly 
insolvent banks representing 2.5 % of the banking sector’s assets . The remaining banks 
included in the program became subject to various forms of heightened supervision and 
restructuring (Enoch 2000; Sharma 2001).  
However, this initial attempt  at addressing weaknesses in the Indonesian banking sector 
contributed to its continued deterioration. The closure of 16 banks fueled concerns that 
additional failures might occur in a system with inadequate deposit insurance . Because the 
Indonesian government did not publicly identify the remaining banks in the program, 
depositors were uncertain about which institutions were healthy and which were not 
(Sharma 2001). Additionally, the fact that certain of the country’s most visi bly weak banks 
were not included among those closed led observers to believe that the government’s criteria 
adopted by the government for closure were arbitrary (Pangestu 2003).5 
Finally, i ndications that the government would not allow connected bankers’ and 
businessmen’s firms to fail also damaged confidence (Djiwandono 2005). 
The condition of the financial system in Indonesia thus worsened over the following months. 
Bank runs became pervasive and the rupiah depreciated by 80% (Enoch 2000). This erosion 
of the banks’ deposit base meant that Bank Indonesia (BI), the country’s central bank, had to 
provide massive amounts of liquidity: during December 19976 alone, this support increased 
from IDR 13 trillion to IDR 31 trillion, equivalent to 5% of GDP (Sharma 2001). 
By January 1998, the rupiah headed into free fall. The Indonesian government signed a 
second letter of intent with the IMF on January 15, 1998, but clearly remained unable to fulfill 
its commitments. The currency fell further, and the banking sector’s problems deteriorated 
into a “full-fledged systemic crisis” (Lindgren et al. 1999). 
Thus, on January 27, 1998, the government announced a three -pronged emergency plan to 
deal with problems in the banking sector: a blanket guarantee of th e debts of all domestic 
banks;7 a framework for corporate restructuring ; and the establishment , for a five -year 
period, of the Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency (IBRA), which would function as a new 
regulatory agency for the banking industry under the auspices of the Ministry of Finance 
(MOF). During IBRA’s first operative year , the Indonesian economy contracted for the first 
 
5 However, former Indonesian central bank governor J. Soedradjad Djiwandono stated that the country’s 
finance minister in Parliament in 1997 mentioned five criteria for a bank to be targeted for closure: (1) bank 
assets that could not cover liabilities; (2) a bank had insufficient income to meet its liabilities caused by bad 
debts; (3) a bank ’s inability to mobilize public funds, forcing it to rely on the inter -bank money market; (4) 
negative net worth; and (5) ignoring repeated warnings from the central bank (Djiwandono 2005). 
6 During December 1997, the exchange rate of rupiah to $1 stood at 4,650 (OECD 2020). 
 
7 This excluded subordinated debt and the debts of bank owners. The guarantee was set to expire on January 
31, 2000, at which point it would be replaced by a deposit insurance scheme; the guarantee was applied 
retroactively to the 16 liquidated banks (Sharma 2001). 
 
386
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
time since the 1960s, and the country’s president abruptly resigned after intense domestic 
and international pressure to do so (Sharma 2001). 
Program Description 
IBRA was set up to perform three main roles: 
1. “To implement the government guarantee program, including the registration of 
banks’ liability, premium payments, and the administering of claim verifications.” 
2. “To restructure banks through closures, mergers, recapitalizations and eventually the 
sale of government ownership in these troubled banks; to recover the transferred bad 
loans; and to monitor and sell corporate assets pledged or transferred to IBRA from 
former bank owners as collateral for emergency BI liquidity credits” 
3. “The coordination and supervision of banks that had been frozen or closed, in order 
to complete the whole process of closing banks” (Pangestu 2003) 
This case will focus on one key component of  the second of these roles : the creation of  an 
asset management unit (AMU /AMC) to handle the nonperforming loans in the Indonesian 
banking sector. 
The Indonesian government established IBRA as an ostensibly independent agency 
reporting to the Ministry of F inance (Sharma 2001) . A senior official from the MOF was 
appointed to head IBRA, and several hundred employees from the MOF and BI were assigned 
to it to provide immediate staffing (Enoch 2000). In February 1998, IBRA took its first major 
action, bringing 54 banks (representing almost 40% of the sector) that had borrowed heavily 
from BI under its umbrella, subjecting them to on-site IBRA supervision and memoranda of 
understanding restricting their activities (Enoch 2000; Bank Indonesia 1998). In April 1998, 
IBRA assumed ownership of seven banks representing 16% of the banking system’s 
liabilities and closed a further seven small banks (Enoch 2000). 
Audits of the banks taken over in April undertaken by international accounting firms in the 
summer of 1998 revealed that levels of nonperforming loans ranged from 55% to more than 
90% (Sharma 2001). Results of audits of 15 large non-IBRA banks (presumed to be among 
the healthiest in the country) released in August 1998 showed similar weakness, prompting 
concerns about the solvency o f the banking system as a whole  (Lindgren et al. 1999) . In 
response, Indonesia announced a major recapitalization plan in September 1998. This plan 
sorted the country ’s banks into three categories based on their capital ratios , as seen in 
Figure 1. 
387
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1: Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) Categories, Based on Audits of All Banks in 
Indonesia 
Category Description Action 
A CAR of 4% or 
more 
Excluded from the recapitalization program  
B CAR  from –25% 
and up to less 
than 4% 
Allowed to submit business plans detailing their 
viability over a three-year period to be assessed by 
independent advisors; if these plans were approved, and 
if the bank’s owners and managers then passed a “fit-
and-proper” competence test by the BI,8 it could 
participate in joint recapitalization with the 
government9 
C CAR less than  
–25% 
Not eligible for government support and would be 
liquidated 
Sources: Bank Indonesia 1999; IBRA 1999; Sharma 2001; Enoch 2000. 
The AMU/AMC would be responsible for managing the assets of banks closed by IBRA. 
Additionally, IBRA required those Category B banks that participated in joint recapitalization 
to transfer their Category 5 loans (loans in the lowest of Indonesia’s five performance 
categories and thus deemed a total loss) to the AMU/AMC (IBRA 1999; Lindgren et al. 1999). 
Such banks could also opt to transfer their Category 4 loans (loans in the second lowest of 
Indonesia’s five categories and thus deemed doubtful). Banks would transfer the loans to the 
AMU/AMC at no cost, but any proceeds realized would be transferred to the banks to be used 
to buy back the preference shares issued to the Indonesian government in connection with 
the joint recapitalization (Lindgren et al. 1999). IBRA auditors would verify the status of the 
loans to “ensure that the nonperforming loans [were] genuine and not simply debt relief for 
well-connected borrowers”  (Adams, Litan, and Pomerleano 2000) . Additionally, t he 
 
8 Bank managers had to pass a test ensuring that they were technically competent enough to run their bank 
(Sharma 2001; Enoch 2000).  
 
9 This joint recapitalization would proceed as follows: the bank “supplied unborrowed resources equivalent to 
20% of the shortfall from the 4% capital asset ratio requirement [for all Indonesian banks at year -end 1998], 
the go vernment would supply the remaining 80% of the shortfall. The government would obtain a 
commensurate shareholding in the bank but would leave the owners in day -to-day control of the bank, and 
provide the owners with the first option to buy back their share holdings at the end of three years” (Enoch 
2000). The shareholders were requir ed to provide their 20% in cash before IBRA made any contributions 
(Sharma 2001). 
 
388
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
AMU/AMC managed certain non-core assets such as buildings, cars, and office equipment 
obtained while liquidating banks (IBRA 1999; Fung et al. 2004). 
Policymakers also created the asset management and investment (AMI) unit, which handled 
assets pledged by former bank shareholders to settle claims stemming from violations of 
prudential norms , as well as  equity stakes in recapitalized banks (IBRA 1999; Fung et al. 
2004; IMF Staff 2002) . Because IBRA’s legal powers were initially limited, officials utilized 
contracts with banks to perform some of its functions.  In exchange for its guarantee, IBRA 
required in its contracts, among other demands, that bankers agree to more “intrusive” 
supervision and that the institutions comply with the country’s prudential regulations 
(Enoch et al. 2001) . The breach of the latter requirement , typically exceeding legal lending 
limits, led to settlements in which shareholders agreed to pledge sufficient collateral to settle 
the claims (Enoch et al. 2001 ; IMF Staff 2002 ; IBRA 1999 ). If shareholders were unable to 
pledge sufficient collateral, the settlement required that they “refinance” their obligation and 
provide a personal guarantee for the entire liability (IMF Staff 2002 ; IBRA 1999) . 
Policymakers devised the scheme to recover some public sector spending for insolvent 
banks in situations in which the courts were likely unable to be of immediate use and where 
some owners retained “substantial financial wealth” (Enoch et al. 2001) . This became a 
major part of IBRA’s recoveries.  
Given the resource constraints on IBRA, it was unable to deal with all of the nonperforming 
loans on its own. The AMU/AMC directly handled only those loans greater than IDR 25 
billion, allowing the banks themselves to manage smaller loans either thr ough a 
subcontracting arrangement with IBRA or directly, depending on size (Sharma 2001). 
The AMU/AMC escalated its actions taken against the largest defaulting borrowers. In early 
1999, the Minister of Finance created a framework that classified uncooperative borrowers 
by their economic viability and degree of cooperation with IBR A and included plans of how 
to deal with them. The MOF developed a schedule to this effect and tackled the l argest 
debtors first; publicity was a key element of the strategy, as the names of the debtors were 
regularly published (Enoch et al. 2001). Given limited resources, the AMU/AMC focused its 
restructuring efforts primarily on its 21 largest debtors (Fung et al. 2004). 
The AMU/AMC disposed of loan assets according to size. It did this in three primary ways: 
(1) through corporate loan sales via open auction, (2) by outsourcing for commercial loans 
through a selected third party (servicing agent), and (3) by dealing with small and medium 
enterprise (SME) and retail loans, which it sold through open tender auction and crash 
programs that allowed the debtor to settle debts by providing a 100% discount on interest 
and penalty as well as 25% discount on principal for productive loans only (Fung et al. 2004). 
Outcomes 
Figure 2 shows the breakdown of the Indonesian banking sector prior to IBRA’s adoption 
and how IBRA’s operations ultimately changed the sector. As indicated in Figure 2, 
Indonesia’s bank sorting exercise identified 73 Category A private banks not in need of 
government assistance, 37 Category B private banks potentially eligible for joint 
recapitalization, and 17 Category C banks to be liquidated.  Of the 37 Category B private 
banks, nine were ultimately eligible for joint recapitalization. 
389
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 2: Indonesian Banking Sector, Before and During IBRA 
 
 
 
 
Source: Fane and McLeod 2002. 
By April 2003, the AMU/AMC had acquired IDR 392 trillion in face value of loans  from 
recapitalized banks and from institutions that IBRA had liquidated (see Figure 3). The largest 
loans of more than IDR 50 billion comprised the bulk of the total principal outstanding.  
Approximately half of the loans acquired were foreign currency-denominated, primarily in 
the US dollar (Fung et al. 2004). 
390
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 3: Loans Acquired by IBRA 
 
 
 
 
Source: Fung et al. 2004.10 
Despite having been in operation since January 1998, IBRA was not able to begin disposing 
of assets until mid -1999. This was due to a host of factors , including inadequate loan 
documentation and administration, insufficient collateral, and the difficulty involved in 
selling such highly distressed loans. The average recovery rate for assets between 1999 and 
2004 was approximately 25%  (IMF Staff 2004) . However, Guerin (2002) wrote in the Asia 
Times in September 2002  that “IBRA’s recent success in asset auctions  . . . lost some of its 
gloss when it was disclosed that the very people who owned them in the first place probably 
bought most of these assets back—at an average 25 cents on the dollar.” 
IBRA’s attempts at loan restructuring , having focused primarily on the 21 largest debtors, 
achieved more limited results with other loans. As shown in Figure 4, while the restructuring 
of almost all debt of the 21 largest debtors was either complete or in late stages by June 2002, 
the corresponding figure for debtors outside the top 50 largest was less than 40%. 
 
10 The second “SME/Retail” figure included in the table’s note is mislabeled and should read “Corporate.”  
391
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4: Loans Restructured by IBRA 
 
 
 
 
Source: Fung et al. 2004. 
IBRA wound down on its initially scheduled end date of February 27, 2004  (Omori 2014). 
However, it had not completed its work within the timeframe allotted, and it still held 
approximately $8.3 billion in assets, which were shifted in part to a new asset management 
company under the MOF and in part to an oversight committee of cabinet ministers. Thus, it 
appears that IBRA wound down up in name only. At the time, there were still 1,361 reported 
unresolved legal cases surrounding its portfolio, which came to IDR 25 bill ion and 
encompassed 447 debtors (McLeod 2005). 
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a Package: Policymakers combined t he AMU/AMC with bank 
recapitalization, both part of a three-pronged emergency plan to deal with 
problems in the banking sector , along with a blanket guarantee and a framework 
for corporate restructuring. 
The emergency plan  introduced by the government on January 27, 1998 , in response to 
worsening conditions in the Indonesian banking sector and pressure from the IMF, entailed 
a blanket guarantee  of the debts of all domestic banks , a framework for corporate 
restructuring, and the establishment (for a five -year period) of IBRA, which would function 
as a new regulatory agency for the banking industry under the auspices of the Ministry of 
Finance (Sharma 2001). IBRA also took on assets from banks slated for liquidation and from 
institutions requesting recapitalization.  
The blanket guarantee was an attempt to stem the bank runs that were then destabilizing 
the system. It covered deposits and most other creditor claims (excluding subordinated 
debt) of domestically incorporated banks, whether denominated in rupiah or foreig n 
392
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
currencies. The framework for corporate restructuring, meanwhile, called for a voluntary, 
temporary suspension of payments on corporate external debt.  “However, the government 
made it clear that there would be no use of public financing, guarantee, or su bsidy to erase 
the debt and reimburse unguaranteed creditors looking for financial redress ” (Sharma 
2001). 
The share of corporate debt held by foreign private banks, roughly two -thirds, influenced 
Indonesia’s corporate restructuring strategy (Iskander et a l. 1999). Indonesia officials met 
with its biggest foreign creditors in Frankfurt, Germany , in June 1998 and reached an 
agreement to offer foreign exchange cover for Indonesian companies with foreign-currency-
denominated debt (after reaching debt restructuring agreements)  (Iskander et al. 1999 ; 
Sharma 2001). Then, in September 1998, the Indonesian government introduced the Jakarta 
Initiative and the Jakarta Initiative Task Force to facilitate voluntary negotiations between 
parties for corporate res tructuring and to secure necessary regulatory approval for deals  
(Sharma 2001). Additionally, changes to bankruptcy law were introduced in August 1998 
that improved efficiency, transparency, and, among a variety of over revisions, placed 
limitations on secured creditors’ ability to foreclose on collateral during proceedings, “thus 
making reorganizations more likely” (Iskander et al. 1999). 
In short, IBRA was in charge of restructuring corporate borrowers’ debt held by state banks 
and recapitalized banks, while the Jakarta Initiative handled corporate borrowers’ foreign 
debts (Bank Indonesia 2001). 
2. Legal Authority: Indonesia issued a presidential decree to establish IBRA and later 
strengthened its legal powers to enable the AMU/AMC to operate effectively. 
On January 26, 1998 , the Decree of the President of the Republic of Indonesia No.  27 
established IBRA for a period of five years under the auspices of the Ministry of Finance  
(Decree No. 27 1998). The AMU/AMC was in turn established under the auspices of IBRA as 
a separate asset management entity (Sharma 2001). Despite this authorization, the absence 
of certain powers hampered IBRA’s effectiveness, particularly when its goals were at odds 
with entrenched political and business interests. 
Specifically, IBRA did not have the necessary ability to transfer assets or to foreclose on 
collateral. Provisions of the Law No. 10 of 1998 (the Banking Law) passed in October 1998 
solidified the legal basis for the organization’s activities (IBRA 1999). These amendments to 
Section 37A of the Banking Law strengthened the legal powers of both IBRA and the 
AMU/AMC, empowering them with the ability to transfer assets and foreclose against a 
nonperforming debtor (Lindgren et al. 1999; IBRA 1999). 
IBRA also faced challenges through the court system, “where—even after a challenge to the 
constitutionality of  IBRA's powers was dismissed —IBRA's bankruptcy petitions were 
rejected by judge after judge” (Enoch et al. 2001). IBRA finally began winning these cases in 
mid-2000 (Enoch et al. 2001). 
Legal and regulatory mechanisms were often unable to make up for powerful political and 
business interests. An IMF analyst estimated that the top 10 families in Indonesia in the late 
1990s controlled corporations worth more th an half the country's market capitalization  
393
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 16 ---
(Iskander et al. 1999) . Many of the bank shareholders were prominent individuals with 
strong political connections who appear to have kept IBRA from enforcing agreements, 
despite the entity possessing strong enfo rcement mechanisms  (IMF Staff 2004) . For 
example, IBRA took over one of the country’s largest banks, BDNI, and, under the Jakarta 
Stock Exchange rules, needed a declaration of insolvency for the bank  to be able to write 
down shareholders’ stakes. BDNI’s shareholders were able to utilize technical procedures to 
prevent the declaration  (Enoch 2000). Well-connected businessmen, particularly those in 
contact with the former president Suharto’s family, were  able to delay IBRA’s plans  too 
(Omori 2014). 
Last, IBRA was “subject to considerable political interference ,” with some restructuring 
agreements seeming to “focus on meeting employment or national interest concerns, rather 
than placing the firm on a commercially viable footing ” (IMF Staff 2004). The “prospective 
redistribution of wealth in Indonesia was so substantial that the vested interests that IBRA 
encountered were pervasive across its operations” (Enoch et al. 2001).  
3. Special Powers: Indonesian officials vested IBRA with extrajudicial powers to seize 
assets of uncooperative debtors. 
Policymakers eventually equipped IBRA with so -called PP17 powers in October 1999 to 
“drive debt without judicial rulings” (Gooptu et al. 2000). IBRA, like any other creditor, could 
use the normal bankruptcy proces s, but the PP17 powers  allowed IBRA to seize assets of 
uncooperative debtors. IBRA initially used these powers two months later in December to 
seize 14 hectares of property from PT Sinar Slipi Sejahtera , a debtor firm owned by former 
president Suharto's daughter (Gooptu et al. 2000).  
Still, statements made in subsequent years by an IBRA chairman suggested the seizure 
powers were not used often. During a meeting with a government committee in 2003, then–
IBRA chairman Syafruddin A. Temenggung  complained that IBRA was generally unable to 
exercise these powers. Temenggung stated that of 76 attempted seizures, only three were 
successful, with the country’s courts ruling against the rest (Tempo 2004). 
4. Mandate: Indonesian policymakers established the AMU/AMC to clean up banks’ 
balance sheets. 
The AMU/AMC ran the  “loan workout on the transferred loans to maximize their return”  
(Bank Indonesia 1999). Because of the large volume of transferred assets, policymakers also 
gave the AMU/AMC the ability to subcontract certain loan management to eligible banks. 
Last, proceeds from loan repayment were used to dilute the size of government stocks in 
participating financial institutions (Bank Indonesia 1999). 
5. Communication: The Indonesian government initially restricted communication 
about IBRA. 
The closure of 16 banks in November 1997 as part of the original IMF agreement contributed 
to a run on the Indonesian banking system.  The Indonesian government later determined 
not to publicize the early operations of IBRA following its establishment in January 1998.  
Specifically, a last -minute decision was made not to publicly disclose the February 1998 
394
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
move to bring 54 banks under IBRA’s umbrella  (Enoch 2000). This initial misstep “failed to 
strengthen market sentiment” (IMF Staff 2004) and caused the public to perceive of IBRA as 
a nonoperational “paper  tiger” during the preliminary stages of its operations  (Sharma 
2001). The lack of publicity also seems to have unde rmined the status of IBRA officials 
working onsite at those banks subject to the operation (Enoch 2000). 
Still, Indonesia appointed a new IBRA team in March 1998 , which acknowledged the need 
for “transparency and uniformity of treatment of the banks” and publicity for its decisions  
(Enoch 2000). This strategy shift included hiring public relations professionals that helped 
the institution communicate its interventions and decisions  (Enoch 2000). In 1999, IBRA 
officials stated the goal of the agency’s c ommunication strategy was to “maintain support 
from the public at large for IBRA through providing correct, timely and complete information 
on IBRA and its activities” (IBRA 1999).  
6. Ownership Structure: IBRA was established as an ostensibly independent age ncy 
reporting to the Ministry of Finance. 
Omori (2014) writes that despite “the IMF’s suggestion that the IBRA should be an 
autonomous body, [it] was placed under the MOF’s authority and was thus dependent upon 
the ministry” (Omori 2014). Still, BI called IBRA “autonomous” in an annual report  (Bank 
Indonesia 1998). 
7. Governance/Administration: A MOF senior official, the state -owned enterprises 
minister, and the Financial Sector Policy Committee oversaw IBRA. 
A senior official from the MOF was appointed  to head IBRA, and several hundred staff 
members from the MOF and BI were assigned to it as staff (Enoch 2000). 
The state -owned enterprises minister and the Financial Sector Policy Committee (FSPC) 
oversaw IBRA. The FSPC was a government body chaired by th e Coordinating Minister of 
Economy “to decide and coordinate government policies on the financial system ” (Fung et 
al. 2004). Its members included the ministers of finance and trade and industry and the state 
ministers of national planning and state-owned enterprise (Fung et al. 2004; IBRA 1999). 
The Oversight Committee (OC) , which was set up by and reported to the FSPC , met at least 
weekly and monitored IBRA’s performance and provide d independent review of IBRA’s 
restructuring. The OC made recommendations about matters such as transparency and asset 
disposals. The body consisted of nine members , including a former minister of finance, the 
chairman of IBRA, and representatives from the private sector and the academic world (Fung 
et al. 2004) . Officials tasked the OC with independent review  of the largest corporate 
restructuring transactions prior to their submission to the government for final approval . 
Policymakers gave the OC the new m andate as they strengthened corporate debt 
restructuring principles in 2001 in response to criticism regarding generous restructuring 
terms to some of IBRA’s largest debtors . The OC’s recommendations were not binding, but 
the mere publishing  of them  “meant that the final restructuring terms agreed by the 
government would be subjected to somewhat greater public scrutiny” (IMF Staff 2004). 
395
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 18 ---
OC reports do not appear to be publicly available,  but a September 2001 news report from 
the Jakarta Post  suggests that officials created a public website meant to house the OC’s 
reviews and activities (Jakarta Post 2001).11 This web page may have been part of a larger 
website that IBRA officials operated that acted as a general information center for the public 
(IBRA 1999). 
Policymakers established the Audit Committee, a standing committee of the OC that included 
five independent professionals, “to enhance the standard of financial reporting by IBRA and 
to ensure standards of corporate governance and control ” (Fung et al. 2004). Internal audit 
was formed later in 1998 to ensure transparency. Additionally, IBRA employed independent 
public accountants to audit its financial statements (Fung et al. 2004). Figure 5 illustrates the 
governance structure for IBRA. 
Figure 5: IBRA Governance Structure 
 
 
 
 
Source: Fung et al. 2004. 
A number of external, independent parties, including the House of People’s Representatives 
and the Supreme Audit Agency, possessed the right to conduct reviews and audits of IBRA’s 
operational activities  (IBRA 1999). The extent to which external parties did so is unclear 
with available documents. 
Despite its ostensible independence, IBRA faced regular political interventions, often at the 
highest levels. At the beginning of the entity’s existence, President Suharto re fused to 
publicize certain IBRA operations  and fired a BI governor and the head of IBRA  (Sharma 
2001). President Suharto’s successor later threatened to reverse the joint recapitalization 
plan and instead briefly pushed for forced mergers (Lindgren et al. 1999). 
Additionally, IBRA has been described as “needing to obtain political authority even for its 
technical operations” (Enoch 2000). This stems partly from the fact that IBRA was subject to 
the influence of many political entities, from the BI to Parliament and the IMF, because of its 
broad mandate (Fung et al. 2004) . Smaller levels of  political and bureaucratic interference 
 
11 The web address the article gives does not lead to a working website, and web archive searches do not 
reveal archived versions of the website. 
396
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
can be seen in IBRA’s initial relationship with the BI, whose staff members saw IBRA “ as an 
indictment of their record” and were at times uncooperative (Enoch 2000). 
One of IBRA’s biggest errors resulted in part from both political intervention and governance 
failures. Bank Bali, one of the country’s largest banks, made side payments to a government-
connected firm to receive payments under the inter -bank guarantee to close its capital 
shortfall and gain access to the recapitalization program. The fallout was broad. IBRA and BI 
officials were fired, and criminal charges were brought against “intermediaries, although no 
convictions were secured ” (Enoch et al. 2001) . This scandal led t he IMF to suspend its 
funding to Indonesia in September 1999 (Sharma 2001). 
The political storm s urrounding the so-called BLBI bonds is another example. These bonds 
were used as liquidity assistance by BI to provide emergency loans to banks that experienced 
liquidity problems during the Asian crisis  (Fung et al. 2004) . Pangestu (2003) writes that 
there “are many controversies surrounding the issuance of BLBI bonds regarding the size of 
the liquidity support that could be much larger than the asset [s] of the troubled bank itself; 
and that the assets pledged by the bank owners and shareholders in return to the support 
given by Bank Indonesia being significantly less than the amount of liquidity support 
received by these banks .” An investigative audit by  the country’s Supreme Audit Agency 
found that trillions of rupiah issued in 1997 to 1998 were misused by the recipient banks, 
“most of which were owned by cronies or relatives of Soeharto [sic]” (Stern 2004).  Stern 
(2004) argues the “ issue of whether Bank  Indonesia management should have behaved 
differently . . . will not be easily resolved.” The controversy has continued . In recent years, 
the government has brought charges against former IBRA chairman Temenggung and others 
(Hasbullah 2019).  
Together, these problems contributed to major turnover among senior staff, including seven 
different chairmen in a four-year period (Fung et al. 2004).  
8. Size: There was no pre-established limitation on the AMU/AMC’s size. 
Available documentation does not suggest policymakers established size limits for IBRA’s 
AMU/AMC. The AMU/AMC ultimately acquired almost IDR 400 trillion in face value of loans 
(Fung et al. 2004; IMF Staff 2004).  
9. Funding Source: The Indonesian public contributed $20 billion for nonperforming 
loans or capital for IBRA’s AMU/AMC. 
As of mid-1999, the Indonesian public spent, in total, $85 billion USD on the financial system 
restructuring efforts, with most of the funds paying for recapitalization and liquidity support 
(Lindgren et al. 1999). IBRA was financed by a combination of both medium- and long-term 
government-guaranteed bonds paying an average of 14% annually in interest; some of these 
bonds were inflation indexed (Sharma 2001). 
All cash recovered from IBRA’s operations, after expense deductions,  was transferred to 
reduce the state budget deficit (Fung et al. 2004). 
397
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 20 ---
10. Eligible Institutions: Institutions required to transfer assets to the AMU/AMC 
included those liquidated by IBRA and  those participating in a joint 
recapitalization with IBRA. 
The Indonesian government established IBRA in part to oversee the closure of banks that 
were deemed too insolvent to be eligible for assistance. Indonesian policymakers separated 
banks into three categories  based on independent audits of all state, nationalized, regional, 
and private banks (Sharma 2001). The categories are detailed in  the Program Description 
section of this study . Banks participating in the recapitalizat ion program were required to 
transfer some of their bad assets to the AMU/AMC , the selection of which is detailed in Key 
Design Decision No. 11, on  eligible assets (Bank Indonesia 1999) . As part of the closure  of 
chosen banks, assets were transferred to the AMU/AMC to manage (Sharma 2001). 
11. Eligible Assets: The AMU/AMC focused on the most distressed nonperforming 
loans. 
New regulations passed in December 1998 established five categories for the cl assification 
of loans, as shown in Figure 6. 
Figure 6: Loan Classifications 
Category Required Provisioning 
Pass 1% 
Special Mention 5% 
Substandard 15% 
Doubtful 50% 
Loss 100% 
Source: Lindgren et al. 1999. 
The AMU/AMC managed loans in all categories from the banks IBRA closed . Banks 
participating in IBRA’s joint recapitalization program had to transfer Category 5 loans to the 
AMU/AMC. The banks could also opt to transfer their Category 4 loans  (Bank Indonesia 
1999). 
Corporate loans made up approximately 84% of IBRA’s loan portfolio, which also included 
retail and SME debt at about 8% and commercial loans at about 8% (IMF Staff 2002). 
398
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
12. Acquisition - Mechanics: Policymakers limited the size of the loans the AMU/AMC 
handled in house.  
There were limitations on t he size of the loans the AMU/AMC handled directly. The 
AMU/AMC subcontracted management of bad loans valued between IDR 5 billion and IDR 
25 billion back to the individual banks and supervised their efforts . Individual banks 
remained responsible for handling loans of less than IDR 5 billion. The AMU/AMC directly 
handled only those loans of greater than IDR 25 billion (Sharma 2001). 
13. Acquisition - Pricing: Banks transferred assets  to the AMU/AMC at no cost  but 
received any proceeds from their ultimate disposal. 
Banks transfer red nonperforming loans to the AMU/AMC at no cost , but  any proceeds 
realized were transferred to the banks to be used to buy  back the preference shares issued 
to the Indonesian government in connection with th e joint recapitalizatio n. This approach 
provided the government with the prospect of an early return on its recapitalization 
investment and reduced the amount the legacy shareholders would have to pay to regain full 
control of the bank (Lindgren et al. 1999). 
14. Management and Disposal: The AMU/AMC disposed of loan assets according to 
size. 
The AMU/AMC disposed of loan assets in three ways: through corporate loan sales via open 
auction, by outsourcing for commercial loans through a selected third party (servicing 
agent), and by dealing with small and medium enterprise (SME) and retail loans, which it 
sold through open tender a uction and “crash” programs that allowed the debtor to settle 
debts by providing a 100% discount on interest and penalty as well as 25% discount on 
principal for productive loans only  (Fung et al. 2004) . Loans that did not enter these retail 
and SME mechanisms were offered for sale through loan auctions (IMF Staff 2002). 
Policymakers utilized the outsourcing strategy to allow IBRA to deploy its resources to 
restructure corporate loans, which made up most of IBRA’s loan portfolio. Between May and 
August 2000, IBRA engaged four banks to service separate tranches of commercial loans, 
with a total face value of roughly IDR 13.5 trillion . These servicing agents were paid a 
management fee for handling the assets and following up on debt servicing issues (IMF Staff 
2002). Further details about servicing arrangements are unclear from the  available 
documentation. 
IBRA also introduced several new asset programs that the AMU/AMC used to speed up the 
loan sale process. These included the asset to bond swap program  for corporate loans 
(introduced in late 2001) , by which eligible investors were able to use government 
recapitalization bonds as payment for IBRA assets;  the collateralized debt obligation (CDO), 
through which IBRA securitized a diversified portfolio of restructured loans and loans in the 
MOU stage in late 2002; and the loans that were not restructured , through which IBRA sold 
many unrestructured corporate, commercial, and retail loans in 2002 (Fung et al. 2004). 
This last change was “fundamental” and “based on the realization that the restructuring 
progress had stagnated and had put at risk IBRA’s ability to complete the asset recovery 
399
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 22 ---
process before the expiry of its mandate” (IMF Staff 2004). BI stated in its 2000 annual report 
that restructuring progress was hindered by difficulties related to the size of haircuts on debt 
principal owed to lending syndicates made up of foreign banks, state banks, and private 
domestic banks. The central bank als o mentioned the then -volatile exchange rate and the 
imposition of income taxes on debtors on the haircuts (Bank Indonesia 2001). 
IBRA officials thought “ shifting the restructuring responsibility to the private sector would 
increase asset recovery, as investors would place value on the added flexibility to restructure 
the assets in accordance with their own financial and strategic consideration s” (IMF Staff 
2004). This strategy shift suggested political influence, powerful interests, and IBRA’s lack 
of stronger powers frustrated IBRA staffers, leading them to “slowly [surrender] its battle of 
attrition with the country's richest, most powerful people” and to begin selling loans “one by 
one, unrestructured—loans that many bankers and former IBRA officials  say are virtually 
worthless to anyone but the borrowers” (Arnold 2003). 
IBRA’s initial restructuring aims centered on so -called Top 21 obligors , named as such 
because of their roughly one -third share of total IBRA loans . Officials utilized an “obligor” 
concept to manage loan assets, which involved handling debtor companies belonging to the 
same conglomerate, or obligor, together (IMF Staff 2002) . The restructuring itself entail ed 
an assessment of the debtor company’s financial situation with a subsequent determination 
of a “sustainable” amount of debt , which would be sold.  The unsustainable portion was 
converted into equity or quasi -equity with an eye toward eventual sale (IMF Staff 2002) . 
Policymakers initially attempted to restructure loans prior to sale for three reasons: 
• to aid real sector recovery through improvement of the financial position of indebted 
firms, thus allowing them to regain access to credit markets; 
• to improve corporate governance and managerial control  (as IBRA was usuall y the 
primary creditor and could install new management); and  
• to strengthen the banking system prior to the return of  a large amount of 
nonperforming loans (IMF Staff 2002). 
15. Timeframe: IBRA was established with a five-year window of operation. 
IBRA’s stated rationale for having a pre -defined lifespan of five years was that its existence 
was a reminder that the country was in crisis such that ceasing operations as soon as possible 
would be beneficial (Fung et al. 2004). IBRA formally wound down on its initially scheduled 
end date of February 27, 2004  (Omori 2014). Yet at the time it still held billions in assets, 
which were shifted in part to a new asset management company under the MOF and in part 
to an oversight committee of cabinet ministers. 
III. Evaluation 
The AMU/AMC took over assets  from a variety of institutions during the financial sector 
restructuring to deal with the “unprecedented” amount of nonperforming loans in the 
banking system (Sharma 2001) . Still, one criticism of IBRA is that the levels of 
400
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
nonperforming loans in the system remained high even after the asset transfers  (Pangestu 
2003). Nonperforming loans declined to 6% of total loans in September 2003  from 75% at 
the height of the country’s crisis (IMF Staff 2004). 
IBRA was also criticized for being slow to mobilize on the disposal of its assets (both the 
loans it took over and its equity stakes.) Enoch et al. (2001) write that “to some extent, this 
[criticism] is undoubtedly justified,” but “in mitigation, one should recall the deep intensity 
of the crisis and the ongoing political transition, freezing investor interest with regard to any 
involvement in the country”  (82). Further, the authors elaborate , due to IBRA’s reliance on 
special powers, it was unable to operate effectively until the law and the regulations 
surrounding its operation became effective. “For unexplained reasons, each stage of the 
passage of the law was protracted, and it was not until February 1999 that IBRA was able to 
use its powers. As a result, it was, for instance, unable to manage the assets of the banks 
closed in April 1998 for ten months after the closures: the result was undoubtedly a 
depletion in the value of the assets, and an increase in the ultimate cost of the banking sector 
restructuring for the public sector” (111).  
During some (unspecified) part of IBRA’s operational period, it retained assets on its books 
at face value, which kept the organization from negotiating realistic deals. While this reduced 
moral hazard, any deal negotiated appear ed to the public as a loss “rather than a recovery 
from losses incurred earlier.” This is likely to have contributed to IBRA’s poor public image, 
because “it led to a perception that it was selling the country ‘cheap’ and, hence, denied IBRA 
the popular protection that would enable it to better withstand the powerful vested interests 
set against it” (Enoch et al. 2001).  
Additionally, Enoch et al. (2001) elaborate that, due to IBRA’s lack of effective penalties 
against nonperforming debtors, it struggled to collect loans, “which gave rise to ever-higher 
needs for provisioning” (97).The state banks were particularly egregious:  because these 
banks expected that their loss loans would be transferred to the AMU/AMC and they would 
be fully recapitalized, they did not see a  compelling reason  to go after nonperforming 
debtors. “Some banks were particularly generous in their deposit rates, while having no 
evident strategy for enhancing  loan recoveries. The overall result was that, even while the 
nominal interest rate spreads in the banking sector were negative, there was a continued 
need for banks to make additional provisioning, further worsening the insolvency of the 
sector” (97). 
Further, there was difficulty in setting up the legal framework that enabled IBRA to deal with 
its assets, and the amount of labor required to document all of the assets and prepare them 
for sale was enormous (Enoch et al. 2001). There were also major documentation problems, 
which impeded the transfer of loans from frozen and closed banks to IBRA (Fung et al. 2004). 
McLeod (2005) writes that “it is difficult to judge whether IBRA can be regarded as a success. 
Clearly, the amount of cash it [was] able to return to the government [was] only a small 
proportion (about 25%) of the value of the bonds the government issued to bail out banks’ 
creditors . . . but of course most, if not all, of the assets in IBRA’s portfolio were severely 
compromised at the outset,  and there was no realistic expectation that the full book value 
could be recovered. 
401
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 24 ---
“In any case, IBRA’s performance suffered greatly from political interference, as could only 
have been expected given the vast sums involved. Top management of the institu tion was 
changed on numerous occasions as presidents came and went and as each president sought 
to achieve the outcomes desired”  (43). The “prospective redistribution of wealth in 
Indonesia was so substantial that the vested interests that IBRA encountered were pervasive 
across its operations” (Enoch et al. 2001). This political interference was a “major problem 
leading to delays and inconsistencies in the restructuring process” (Pangestu 2003). Some 
restructuring agreements seemed to “focus on meeting empl oyment or national interest 
concerns, rather than placing the firm on a commercially viable footing”  (IMF Staff 2004) . 
Pangestu (2003) argues “ restructuring cannot proceed without the full commitment by 
Government to support the agencies undertaking the restructuring” (32).  
Additionally, efforts were hampered by an implicit guarantee in the financial sector. 
Indonesian bankers believed the government would bail out their institutions, given only 
one bank had been allowed to fail in the 19 90s and there were cases of government banks 
and private banks being bailed out (Pangestu 2003). 
Fung et. al. (2004) have argued that IBRA’s broad mandate may have hampered its 
effectiveness, with one organization acting as “an asset management company, an  agent to 
carry out recapitalization, an agent for the blanket guarantee, a manager/supervisor of 
almost 80% of the banking system, and a restructuring agent of the banking system through, 
e.g. merging banks” (15). 
IBRA's final chairman, Temengg ung, summed up what he saw as one of IBRA’s biggest 
weaknesses: not letting the market play a big enough role. Countries “dealing with 
nonperforming loan problems should push their banks to dispose of bad assets through the 
private sector” (Holland 2004). 
IV. References 
Adams, Charles, Robert E. Litan, and Michael Pomerleano. 2000. Managing Financial and 
Corporate Distress: Lessons from Asia. Brookings Institution Press.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/managing-financial-and-corporate-distress-lessons-asia. 
Arnold, Wayne. 2003. “Indonesian Bank Agency Fading Out.” New York Times , October 2, 
2003.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesian-bank-agency-fading-out. 
Bank Indonesia. 1998. “Bank Indonesia Report for the Financial Year 1997/98 .” Bank 
Indonesia. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-indonesia-report-financial-year-199798. 
Bank Indonesia. 1999. “Bank Indonesia Report for the Financial Year 1998/99 .” Bank 
Indonesia. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-indonesia-report-financial-year-199899. 
402
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
Bank Indonesia. 2001. “Bank Indonesia Annual Report 2000,” 2001. Bank Indonesia.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-indonesia-annual-report-2000. 
“Decree of the Presid ent of the Republic of Indonesia No. 27 of 1998.” Indonesian 
Government.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/decree-president-republic-indonesia-no-27-1998. 
Djiwandono, J. Soedradjad. 2005. Bank Indonesia and the Crisis: An Insider’s View . ISEAS –
Yusof Ishak Institute. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-indonesia-and-crisis-insiders-view. 
Enoch, Charles. 2000. “Interventions in Banks During Banking Crises: The Experience of 
Indonesia,” March 2000. International Monetary Fund.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interventions-banks-during-banking-crises-experience-
indonesia. 
Enoch, Charles, Barbara Baldwin, Olivier Frécaut, and Arto Kovanen. 2001. “Indonesia: 
Anatomy of a Banking Crisis Two Years of Living Dangerously 1997 -99.” WP/01/52, May 
2001. International Monetary Fund.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesia-anatomy-banking-crisis-two-years-living-
dangerously-1997-99. 
Fane, George, and Ross H. McLeod. 2002. “Banking Collapse and Restructuring in Indonesia, 
1997-2001.” Cato Journal 22 (2): 277–95. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banking-collapse-and-restructuring-indonesia-1997-
2001.  
Fung, Ben, Jason George, Stefan Hohl, and Guonan Ma. 2004. “Public Asset Management 
Companies in East Asia.” FSI Occasional Papers, February 26, 2004. Bank for Inte rnational 
Settlements – Financial Stability Institute.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-asset-management-companies-east-asia. 
Gooptu, Sudarshan, Ruth Neyens, Bernard Drum, Sarah Cliffe, and Lant Pritchett. 2000. 
“Indonesia Economic and Social Update.” Brief 51202, January 31, 2000. World Bank.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesia-economic-and-social-update. 
Guerin, Bill. 2002. “Indonesia’s Cycle of Subservience to the IMF.” Asia Times, September 10, 
2002. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesias-cycle-subservience-imf. 
Hasbullah. 2019. “Analysis of Corruption Settlement for Obligor Deviations of Bank 
Indonesia Liquidity Assistance (BLBI).” Indonesian Journal of Criminal Law Studies 4 (1): 15–
28. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/analysis-corruption-settlement-obligor-deviations-
bank-indonesia-liquidity-assistance-blbi. 
403
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 26 ---
Holland, Tom. 2004. “How to Fix a Bank, Revisited.” Wall Street Journal , May 19, 2004.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/how-fix-bank-revisited. 
IBRA. 1999. “Strategic Plan 1999-2004.” Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency. 
IMF Staff. 2002. “Staff Country Reports: Indonesia: Selected Items.” IMF Country Report 
02/154, 2002. International Monetary Fund.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesia-selected-issues. 
IMF Staff. 2004. “Staff Country Reports: Indonesia: Selected Items.” 04/189, July 2004. 
International Monetary Fund.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/staff-country-reports-indonesia-selected-items. 
Iskander, Magdi, Gerald Meyerman, Dale F. Gray, and Sean H agan. 1999. “Corporate 
Restructuring and Governance in East Asia.” Finance and Development /F&D 36 (1).  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/corporate-restructuring-and-governance-east-asia. 
Jakarta Post. 2001. “JP/IBRA’s OC Launches Website.” Jakarta Post , Se ptember 18, 2001.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/jpibras-oc-launches-website. 
Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Tomás J.T. Baliño, Charles Enoch, Anne-Marie Gulde, Marc Quintyn, and 
Leslie Teo. 1999. “Financial Sector Crisis and Restructuring: Lessons from Asia.” O ccasional 
Papers 188. Occasional Papers, 1999. International Monetary Fund.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Lindgren%20et%20al.%20
1999.pdf. 
McLeod, Ross H. 2005. “The Economy: High Growth Remains Elusive.” In Budy P. 
Resosudarmo, ed. The Politics and Economics of Indonesia’s Natural Resources, 31–50. ISEAS–
Yusof Ishak Institute. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/politics-and-economics-indonesias-natural-resources. 
Muhammad, Mar’ie, and J. Soedradjad Djiwandono. 1997. “Letter of Intent  from the 
government of Indonesia to the International Monetary Fund,” October 31, 1997.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/letter-intent-0. 
Omori, Sawa. 2014. “The Politics of Financial Reform in Indonesia: The Asian Financial Crisis 
and Its Aftermath.” Asian Survey  54 (5): 987 –1008. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/politics-financial-reform-indonesia-asian-financial-
crisis-and-its-aftermath.  
Organization for Economic Co -operation and Development  (OECD). 2020. “National 
Currency to US Dollar Spot Exchange Rate for Indonesia.” FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. 
Louis. FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/national-currency-us-dollar-spot-exchange-rate-
indonesia. 
404
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 27 ---
Pangestu, Mari. 2003. “The Indonesian Bank Crisis And Restructuring: Lessons And 
Implications For Other Developing Countries.” In G-24 Discussion Papers . G -24 Discussion 
Paper Series. United Nations.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesian-bank-crisis-and-restructuring-lessons-and-
implications-other-developing. 
Sharma, Shalendra D. 2001. “The Indonesian Financial Crisis: From Banking Crisis to 
Financial Sector Reforms, 1997-2000.” Indonesia, No. 71 (April): 79–110.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesian-financial-crisis-banking-crisis-financial-
sector-reforms-1997-2000. 
 
Stern, Joseph J. 2004. “The Impact of the Crisis – Decline and Recovery.” CID Working Paper 
103, January 2004. Center for International Development at Harvard University.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/impact-crisis-decline-and-recovery. 
Tempo. 2004. “IBRA’s Journey from Time to Time.” Tempo, May 4, 2004.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ibras-journey-time-time. 
 
V. Key Program Documents 
Implementation Documents 
(Decree No. 27 1998) “Decree of the President of the Republic of Indonesia No. 27 of 1998.” 
1998. Indonesian Government.  
Presidential decree establishing IBRA.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/decree-president-republic-indonesia-no-27-1998. 
Press Releases/Announcements 
(Muhammad and Djiwandono 1997) Muhammad, Mar’ie, and J. Soedradjad Djiwandono. 
1997. “Letter of Intent  from the government of Indonesia to the International Monetary 
Fund,” October 31, 1997.  
Letter from Indonesia’s finance minister and central bank governor describing the policies that 
the country intended to implement in the context of its request for fi nancial support from the 
IMF.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/letter-intent-0. 
Media Stories 
(Arnold 2003) Arnold, Wayne. 2003. “Indonesian Bank Agency Fading Out.” New York Times, 
October 2, 2003.  
News article detailing IBRA officials’ actions at the end of its existence.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesian-bank-agency-fading-out. 
405
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 28 ---
(Guerin 2002) Guerin, Bill. 2002. “Indonesia’s Cycle of Subservience to the IMF.” Asia Times, 
September 10, 2002.  
Article initially published in the Asia Times detailing the Indonesian government’s relationship 
with the IMF during the Asian Financial Crisis.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesias-cycle-subservience-imf. 
(Holland 2004) Holland, Tom. 2004. “How to Fix a Bank, Revisited.” Wall Street Journal, May 
19, 2004.  
News article detailing Asian policymakers’ attempts to restructure financial sectors and clean 
up bad loans in the wake of the Asian Financial Crisis.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/how-fix-bank-revisited. 
(Jakarta Post 2001) Jakarta Post. 2001. “JP/IBRA’s OC Launches Website.” Jakarta Post , 
September 18, 2001.  
News article announcing a new government website meant to publicize IBRA’s Oversight 
Committee reports and activities , though the web address the article gives does not lead to a 
working website, and web archive searches do not reveal archived versions of the given website. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/jpibras-oc-launches-website. 
(Tempo 2 004) Tempo. 2004. “IBRA’s Journey from Time to Time.” Tempo, May 4, 2004.  
New article chronicling IBRA’s history.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ibras-journey-time-time. 
Key Academic Papers 
(Adams, Litan, and Pomerleano 2000) Adams, Charles, Robert E. Litan, and Michael 
Pomerleano. 2000. Managing Financial and Corporate Distress: Lessons from Asia. 
Brookings Institution Press.  
Book detailing various lessons learned from financial crises in Asia.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/managing-financial-and-corporate-distress-lessons-asia. 
(Fung et al. 2004) Fung, Ben, Jason George, Stefan Hohl, and Guonan Ma. 2004. “Public Asset 
Management Companies in East Asia.” FSI Occasional Papers, February 26, 2004.  Bank 
for International Settlements – Financial Stability Institute.  
Case study examining asset management companies established in Asia.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-asset-management-companies-east-asia. 
(Gooptu et al. 2000) Gooptu, Sudarshan, Ruth Neyens, Bernard Drum, Sarah Cliffe, and Lant 
Pritchett. 2000. “Indonesia Economic and Social Update.” Brief 51202, January 31, 2000. 
World Bank.  
World Bank report examining various economic and social trends in Indonesia.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesia-economic-and-social-update. 
(IMF Staff 2004) IMF Staff. 2004. “Staff Country Reports: Indonesia: Selected Items.” 04/189, 
July 2004. International Monetary Fund.  
IMF report outlining various Indonesian economic and governmental updates.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/staff-country-reports-indonesia-selected-items. 
406
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 29 ---
(Iskander et al.  1999) Iskander, Magdi, Gerald Meyerman, Dale F. Gra y, and Sean Hagan. 
1999. “Corporate Restructuring and Governance in East Asia.” Finance and 
Development/F&D 36 (1).  
IMF article examining proper corporate restructuring and governance strategies.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/corporate-restructuring-and-governance-east-asia. 
(Lindgren et al. 1999) Lindgren, Carl -Johan, Tomás J.T. Baliño, Charles Enoch, Anne -Marie 
Gulde, Marc Quintyn, and Leslie Teo. 1999. “Financial Sector Crisis and Restructuring: 
Lessons from Asia.” Occasional Papers 188. Occasional Papers, 1999. International Monetary 
Fund.  
IMF paper detailing various Asian financial sector restructuring efforts.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Lindgren%20et%20al.%20
1999.pdf. 
(McLeod 2005) McLeod, Ross H. 2005. “The Economy: High Growth Remains Elusive.” In 
Budy P. Resosudarmo,  ed. The Politics and Economics of Indonesia’s Natural Resources , 31–
50. ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute.  
Book chapter examining Indonesia’s macroeconomic p erformance in the 1990s and early 
2000s. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/politics-and-economics-indonesias-natural-resources. 
(Omori 2014) Omori, Sawa. 2014. “The Politics of Financial Reform in Indonesia: The Asian 
Financial Crisis and Its Aftermath.” Asian Survey 54 (5): 987–1008.  
Research explaining the politics of financial reforms in Indonesia by applying the theory of veto 
players. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/politics-financial-reform-indonesia-asian-financial-
crisis-and-its-aftermath. 
(Stern 2004)  Stern, Joseph J. 2004. “The Impact of the Crisis – Decline and Recovery.” CID 
Working Paper 103, January 2004. Center for International Development at Harvard 
University. 
Working paper about the Asian financial crisis and related recovery efforts.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/impact-crisis-decline-and-recovery. 
Reports/Assessments 
(Bank Indonesia 1998) Bank Indonesia. 1998. “Bank Indonesia Report for the Financial Year 
1997/98.” Bank Indonesia.  
Bank Indonesia annual report detailing that year ’s economic, monetary, and banking 
developments and policy responses.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-indonesia-report-financial-year-199798. 
(Bank Indonesia 1999) Bank Indonesia. 1999. “Bank Indonesia Report for the Financial Year 
1998/99.” Bank Indonesia.  
Bank Indonesia annual report detailing that year’s economic, monetary, and banking 
developments and policy responses.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-indonesia-report-financial-year-199899. 
407
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn

--- Page 30 ---
(Bank Indonesia 2001) Bank Indonesia. 200 1. “Bank Indonesia Annual Report 2000 .” Bank 
Indonesia.  
Bank Indonesia annual report detailing that year’s economic, monetary, and banking 
developments and policy responses.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-indonesia-annual-report-2000. 
(Djiwandono 2005)  Djiwandono, J. Soedradjad. 2005. Bank Indonesia and the Crisis: An 
Insider’s View. ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute.  
Book written by former Indonesian central bank chair  Djiwandono discussing the country’s 
banking crisis in the 1990s.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-indonesia-and-crisis-insiders-view. 
(Enoch 2000) Enoch, Charles. 2000. “Interventions in Banks During Banking Crises: The 
Experience of Indonesia,” March 2000. International Monetary Fund.  
Discussion paper detailing Indonesia’s banking crisis and related interventions.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interventions-banks-during-banking-crises-experience-
indonesia. 
(Enoch et al.  2001) Enoch, Charles, Barbara Baldwin, Olivier Frécaut, and Arto Kovanen. 
2001. “Indonesia: Anatomy of a Banking Crisis Two Years of Living Dangerously 1997 -99.” 
WP/01/52, May 2001. International Monetary Fund.  
IMF working paper detailing Indonesia’s banking crisis.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesia-anatomy-banking-crisis-two-years-living-
dangerously-1997-99. 
(Fane and McLeod 2002) Fane, George, and Ross H. McLeod. 2002. “Banking Collapse and 
Restructuring in Indonesia, 1997-2001.” Cato Journal 22 (2): 277–95.  
Article examining Indonesia’s financial crises and related restructuring efforts.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banking-collapse-and-restructuring-indonesia-1997-
2001. 
(Hasbullah 2019) Hasbullah. 2019. “Analysis of Corruption Settlement for Obligor Deviations 
of Bank Indonesia Liquidity Assistance (BLBI).” Indonesian Journal of Criminal Law Studies 4 
(1): 15–28.  
Journal article analyzing a settlement related to the BLBI.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/analysis-corruption-settlement-obligor-deviations-
bank-indonesia-liquidity-assistance-blbi. 
(IBRA 1999) IBRA. 1999. “ Strategic Pl an 1999 -2004.” Indonesian Bank Restructuring 
Agency. 
IBRA report detailing the agency's purpose, history, and strategy. 
(IMF Staff 2002) IMF Staff. 2002. “Staff Country Reports: Indonesia: Selected Items.” IMF 
Country Report 02/154, 2002. International Monetary Fund.  
IMF report analyzing a variety of developments in Indonesia, including IBRA and its 
performance.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesia-selected-issues. 
408
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 31 ---
(OECD 2020) Organization for Economic Co -operation and Development. 2020. “National 
Currency to US Dollar Spot Exchange Rate for Indonesia.” FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. 
Louis. FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 2020.  
OECD data showing US dollar exchange rate for Indonesian currency.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/national-currency-us-dollar-spot-exchange-rate-
indonesia. 
(Pangestu 2003) Pangestu, Mari. 2003. “The Indonesian Bank Crisis And Restructuring: 
Lessons And Implications For Other Develop ing Countries.” In G-24 Discussion Papers. G-24 
Discussion Paper Series. United Nations.  
G-24 discussion paper examining Indonesia’s banking crisis and restructuring efforts.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesian-bank-crisis-and-restructuring-lessons-and-
implications-other-developing. 
(Sharma 2001) Sharma, Shalendra D. 2001. “The Indonesian Financial Crisis: From Banking 
Crisis to Financial Sector Reforms, 1997-2000.” Indonesia, No. 71 (April): 79–110.  
Journal article detailing the Indonesian financial crisis and related reforms.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesian-financial-crisis-banking-crisis-financial-
sector-reforms-1997-2000. 
 Copyright 2021 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or 
to receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale 
Program for Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
 
 
409
Indonesia: IBRA’s Asset Management Unit Smith and Nunn