--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 3 
2021 
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and 
Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Capital Assistance Program (CAP) 
Aidan Lawson 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Policy 
Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lawson, Aidan (2021) "The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance 
Program (CAP)," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 3, 891-956. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1236 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss3/36 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss3/36

--- Page 3 ---
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program 
(SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP)1 
Aidan Lawson2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
November 12, 2021 
Abstract 
Due to continued stress during the Global Financial Crisis, the US Treasury released a series 
of additional measures in February 2009 that included a mandatory stress test for major U.S. 
bank holding companies (BHCs), backed by government capital. The stre ss test, known as 
the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP), tested the capital adequacy of the 19 
U.S. BHCs that had more than $100 billion in assets. A large interagency team of regulators 
and other experts estimated losses and income under two h ypothetical scenarios for the 
group of BHCs: a baseline that reflected the consensus belief about the course of the current 
recession, and a more adverse scenario that reflected a deeper recession. The estimated loan 
losses under the more adverse scenario were higher than realized losses at any point in U.S. 
history. Ten of the 19 BHCs were required to increase their capital by a total of $75 billion , 
of which $65 billion had to be in the form of common equity. The 10 BHCs had six months to 
increase capital by issuing new shares, selling assets, curtailing payments to shareholders, 
or changing the composition of their capital by converting preferred shares or debt into 
common equity. If those sources were unavailable, they could apply for government capital 
through a backstop facility known as the Capital Assistance Program (CAP). Other banks, 
even if they were not part of the SCAP exercise, could also apply to CAP. Under CAP, Treasury 
would buy mandatorily convertible preferred shares in an institution, subj ect to certain 
restrictions. The shares had onerous terms to encourage institutions to find other sources of 
capital: they paid dividends of 9 percent, required a halt to dividend payments on other 
shares, came with limits on executive compensation, and co ntained warrants that allowed 
Treasury to purchase additional common stock. Ultimately, no institutions applied for CAP 
funds, and it terminated in November 2009. Academics and policymakers praised the 
stringency of the test as well as the Federal Reserve’ s controversial decision to publicly 
release the details and results. They also argued that the availability of government capital 
through CAP was an essential fallback option supporting the stress test exercise. The Fed 
intended its capital targets to be high enough that banks could continue lending to 
creditworthy borrowers during an economic downturn, rather than merely survive. 
 
1 This  case  study  is  part  of  the  Yale  Program  on  Financial  Stability  (YPFS)  selection  of  New  Bagehot  
Project modules considering the responses to the global financial crisis.  
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at https://elis cholar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-
financial-crises/. 
2 Aidan Lawson – Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
891

--- Page 4 ---
Ultimately, all but one of the institutions that the stress test identified as needing capital 
were able to obtain private capital without further government support.  
Keywords: Broad-based capital injections,  CAP, capital backstop, Global Financial Crisis, 
preferred stock, stress tests, United States , SCAP
892
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
At a Glance 
The passage of the Emergency Economic 
Stabilization Act (EESA) on October 3, 
2008, marked the beginning of the US 
government’s aggressive intervention in 
the banking system. The Treasury first 
used its authority under EESA to create 
the Capital Purchase Pr ogram (CPP), in 
which it purchased $205 billion of 
preferred equity in 707 public and 
private banks, S -corporations, and 
mutual banks.  
Markets, however, continued to struggle 
into early 2009. As part of a series of 
additional measures, Treasury released 
a plan in February 2009 that included 
mandatory stress tests for major US 
bank holding companies (BHCs) and a 
government capital backstop for 
institutions that the stress test found to 
need capital but that were unable to 
raise capital from private sources.  
The stress tests, known as the 
Supervisory Capital Assessment 
Program (SCAP), tested the capital 
adequacy of the 19 US BHCs that had 
more than $100 billion in assets. A team of more than 150 regulators and other experts from 
a variety of institutions (in cluding the Federal Reserve, Treasury, and Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation) estimated losses and income under two hypothetical scenarios for 
the group of BHCs. The baseline  scenario reflected the consensus expectations of 
professional forecasters abo ut the depth and duration of the recession; the more adverse 
scenario featured a longer and more severe recession. The scenarios were based on 
estimates of real GDP, unemployment, and house prices. The estimated loan losses under the 
more adverse scenario were higher than realized losses at any point in U.S. history, including 
during the Great Depression. The output of the SCAP exercise was an estimate of the amount 
of common equity each bank would have in the two scenarios. The Federal Reserve released 
the results in May 2009. It required 10 of the 19 BHCs to raise a total of $75 billion in capital, 
mostly in the form of common equity.  
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: To ensure the continued ability of the largest US 
financial institutions to lend to creditworthy borrowers 
by aggressively testing their capital resilience with a 
heavy emphasis on common equity.  
Announcement date February 10, 2009 
Operational date February 25, 2009 
Sunset date  November 9, 2009 
Program size 
An estimated $300 billion was 
available but the exact size 
was unspecified 
Usage Not used 
Outcomes 
Rather than accept CAP capital, 
10 banks increased common 
equity by $76.6 billion through 
various means and the 
government recapitalized 
GMAC through another 
program 
Key features 
Mandatory conversion after 7 
years, 20% step-up clause, 
initial stress-test component 
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program 
(SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) 
893
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 6 ---
The 10 BHCs that failed the stress test had six months to obtain capital either through private 
sources or via a governmen t backstop facility known as the Capital Assistance Program 
(CAP). Banks that did not undergo the stress tests could also apply to the Treasury for a 
government capital injection through CAP. Under CAP, the Treasury would purchase new 
mandatorily convertible preferred shares that were convertible to common equity at a slight 
discount to the institution’s average stock price. The shares paid a relatively onerous 9 
percent dividend and contained 10 -year warrants that allowed the Treasury to purchase 
additional common stock, though the Treasury pledged not to exercise voting rights with 
respect to this stock. CAP shares also included executive compensation and corporate 
governance restrictions. Ultimately, the Treasury required no institutions to use the facility, 
and no institutions voluntarily applied for CAP funds. 
Summary Evaluation 
The Fed’s decision to release the details and results of the stress tests boosted investor 
confidence and helped stabilize financial markets, although such transparency ran again st 
standard supervisory practice at the time. Market participants and experts generally praised 
the stringency of the capital requirements resulting from the severe loss rates in the SCAP. 
They tended to view the stress test as a valuable exercise, with government capital available 
through CAP as an essential fallback option. The Fed intended its capital targets to be high 
enough for banks to be well-capitalized to support the economy, rather than merely survive. 
No banks used CAP. Most were able to obtain capital from private sources, as government 
officials had hoped. One firm that failed the stress test, GMAC, received government capital 
through a separate program. Stress testing became a regular part of bank supervision in the 
U.S. following the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act in 2010.  
894
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
United States Context 2009 -2010 
GDP 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$14,628.0 billion in Q4 2009 
$15,240.8 billion in Q4 2010 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$47,100 in 2009 
$48,468 in 2010 
Sovereign credit rating (five-year senior 
debt) 
As of Q4, 2009: 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
 
As of Q4, 2010: 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
Size of banking system 
$9,789.1 billion in total assets in 
2009 
$9,292.3 billion in total assets in 
2010 
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
GDP 
66.9% in 2009 
61.0% in 2010 
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
financial system 
Assets equal to 30.2% of financial 
system in 2009 
Assets equal to 28.5% of financial 
system in 2010 
Five-bank concentration of banking system 
44.3% of total banking assets in 
2009 
46.0% of total banking assets in 
2010 
Foreign involvement in banking system 
19.0% of total banking assets in 
2009 
16.0% of total banking assets in 
2010 
Government ownership of banking system 0% of banks owned by the state in 
2010 
Existence of deposit insurance 
100% insurance on deposits up to 
$100,000 for 2007 
100% insurance on deposits up to 
$250,000 for 2010 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation 
 
 
895
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 8 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
On October 3, 2008, the U.S. Congress passed the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act 
(EESA) in response to the Global Financial Crisis (P.L. 110-343). The primary component of 
this Act, called the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP), authorized the Treasury to create 
a variety of programs to alleviate stress in banks and other sectors, such as housing and the 
automobile industry (TARP Programs; P.L. 110-343). The largest of these programs was the 
Capital Purchase Program (CPP), in which the US Treasury bought an unprecedented $205 
billion of preferred equity in banks (listed and unlisted), S-corporations, and mutual banks.  
The Treasury encouraged broad participation by banks in the CPP on a voluntary basis. It 
chose to purchase preferred shares in banks, rather than common equity, to prevent the 
government from becoming a significant or controlling shareholder in private com panies 
and to protect taxpayers, since preferred shares rank higher than common equity in the 
capital structure (Jester, Nason, and Norton 2020).   
The CPP began accepting applications on October 14, 2008. N ine of the largest US bank 
holding companies (BHCs) agreed to participate at the outset of the program.3 Participation 
by these nine institutions was publicly announced to “collectively signal the importance of 
the program for the system” (UST PR, 10/14/2008). Ultimately, the Treasury disbursed $205 
billion to 707 banks and trusts  through the CPP and realized a net return of $21.5 bil lion 
(CPP Transaction Data; TARP: Monthly Update).  
The Treasury’s financial market assistance continued with the creation of the Systemically 
Significant Failing Institutions (SSFI) program alongside the CPP and other TARP programs. 
It used the SSFI progr am to inject $40 billion in capital into American International Group 
(AIG), the country’s largest insurance company in November of 2008 (UST Report December 
2008). The Treasury injected a further $30 billion into AIG in March 2009 as its losses 
mounted (AIG Financial Supplement Q3 2010) . The Treasury created the Targeted 
Investment Program (TIP) in December 2008 to support t wo of the CPP’s largest 
beneficiaries, Bank of America and Citigroup ; they each received $20 billion  in preferred 
equity under TIP (UST: TIP). 
Despite these interventions, markets continued to struggle through 2008 and into early 
2009. Investors remained concerned about the adequacy of capital at the largest financial 
institutions. The Obama administration introduced two major policy initiatives in February 
2009. The first was the Financial Stability Plan, announced on February 10. The plan laid out 
 
3 The nine BHCs were Citigroup ($25 billion), JP Morgan ($25 billion), Wells Fargo ($25 billion), Bank of 
America ($15 billion), Mor gan Stanley ($10 billion), Goldman Sachs ($10 billion), Merrill Lynch ($10 billion), 
State Street ($3 billion), and Bank of New York Mellon ($2 billion)  (SIGTARP 10/09/2009 – p. ,20; CPP 
Transaction Data). 
896
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
a strategy to “attack our crisis on all fronts with our full arsenal of financial tools” (UST PR, 
02/10/2009). It included public-private capital programs, consumer and business lending 
initiatives, and increased transparency and accountability for firms obtaining TARP funds.  
The Financial Stability P lan also featured a mandatory stress test for some of the largest 
financial institutions, backed by government capital for institutions that were unable to raise 
private capital (UST PR, 02/10/2009). The stress test and capital backstop came to be known 
as the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and the Capital Assistance Program 
(CAP), respectively.  
The administration’s second major initiative was the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act (ARRA) , which Congress passed  on February  17, 2009. ARRA was a massive fiscal 
stimulus plan designed to be “speedy, substantial, and sustained .” It provided more than 
$700 billion in economic stimulus (Furman 2020). 
Program Description 
The Department of the Treasury released details of the Capita l Assistance Program on 
February 25, 2009, about two weeks after the initial announcement. The Fed launched t he 
stress test on the same day. It said it would use the stress test “to evaluate the capital needs 
of the major  US banking institutions under a mo re challenging economic environment ” 
(SCAP: Design and Implementation; UST PR, 02/25/2009).  
The Treasury and Fed designed SCAP and CAP to address the widespread impression that 
the largest US banks still had insufficient common equity to bear the potentia l losses in an 
ongoing recession. With the CPP, the Treasury had successfully increased banks’ Tier 1 
capital, but with preferred rather than common equity. Treasury  and Fed officials designed 
SCAP and CAP to incentivize banks to find their own path to increase common equity, while 
drawing mostly on private investors. The hope was that, first, the results of the SCAP stress 
tests would reassure investors about the solvency of the largest banks, encouraging them to 
invest new capital; and, second, the terms of the government equity injection in CAP would 
be so onerous that banks would try harder to find private-sector solutions. 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) 
SCAP was a stress test for the largest US bank holding companies (BHCs), in which teams of 
examiners “appl[ied] a consistent and systematic approach across the group to evaluate the 
projected loss and resource estimates submitted by [ the BHCs ]” (SCAP: Design and 
Implementation). Credit intermediation had slowed dramatically due to the recession and a 
widespread loss of confidence in the banking system. Many of the largest financial 
institutions posted significant credit and mark -to-market losses during the financial crisis. 
Their capital was diminished, and they would be less able to absorb further losses should the 
economy continue to worsen . The Treasury and Fed argued that the largest companies 
needed “to hold additional capital to provide a buffer against higher losses than generally 
expected” (SCAP: Design and Implementation).  
897
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 10 ---
The Fed released two papers on SCAP in the spring of 2009. The first, released on April 24, 
described the design of the recently concluded stress tests in detail. The second, released on 
May 7, explained the results. More than 150 people from a variety of supervisory agencies 
were organized into teams tasked with “examining a distinct aspect of the loss and resource 
projections across all 19 participating BHCs” (SCAP: Design and Implementation). 
Any US bank holding company that had more than $100 billion in risk-weighted assets on a 
consolidated basis was required to participate and provide projections of “their credit losses 
and revenues for the two years 2009 and 2010, including the level of reserves that would be 
needed at the end of 2010 to cover expected losses in 2011, under two alternative economic 
scenarios” (SCAP: Design and Implementation). 4 The first scenario, called the baseline, 
“reflected the consensus e xpectation in February 2009 among professional forecasters on 
the depth and duration of the recession.” The more adverse scenario  “characterize[d] a 
recession that [was] longer and more severe than the consensus expectation” (SCAP: Design 
and Implementation). However, the more adverse scenario was not a “worst-case” scenario. 
The Fed argued that the conditions of the stress test ought to be “severe but plausible” (SCAP: 
Design and Implementation).  See Figure 1 for a list of these institutions , which held about 
two-thirds of the assets and more than half the loans in the US banking system (FRB PR, 
04/24/2009). 
 
  
 
4 All BHCs with more than $100 billion in assets at year-end 2008 were required to participate. 
898
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1: Nineteen SCAP Bank Holding Companies, Year-End 2008 Assets and Tier 1 
Capital  
Source: SCAP: Overview of Results 
  
Bank Holding Company Risk-weighted assets  
($ billions) 
Tier 1 capital  
($ billions) 
American Express Company $104.4 $10.1 
Bank of America $1,633.8 $173.2 
BB&T  $109.8 $13.4 
Bank of New York Mellon $115.8 $15.4 
Capital One  $131.8 $16.8 
Citigroup $996.2 $118.8 
Fifth Third  $112.6 $11.9 
GMAC $172.7 $17.4 
Goldman Sachs $444.8 $55.9 
JPMorgan Chase $1,337.5 $136.2 
KeyCorp $106.7 $11.6 
MetLife $326.4 $30.1 
Morgan Stanley $310.6 $47.2 
PNC $250.9 $24,1 
Regions $116.3 $12.1 
State Street  $69.6 $14.1 
SunTrust $162 $17.6 
US Bancorp $230.6 $24.4 
Wells Fargo $1,082.3 $86.4 
899
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 12 ---
The stress test was unprecedented  in the US. “US bank supervisors had never used a 
scenario-based stress test to assess the capital adequacy of banks  and then required capital 
increases based on what those results showed was needed” . Although the Treasury 
announced SCAP, the Fed and other federal banking agencies were the ones who 
administered the program to ensure that markets would believe that the r esults were 
credible (Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs  2020). The difficulty in accurately projecting and 
assessing losses and revenues for the BHCs was amplified due to increased macroeconomic 
stress and uncertainty during this period, but this was precisely the reason that the Fed felt 
the tests were appropriate. The Fed argued that BHCs needed to “have sufficient resources 
to continue to lend to creditworthy borrowers across a wide range of macroeconomic 
outcomes” (SCAP: Design and Implementation). 
Federal bank ing regulators assess ed the vulnerabilities of each BHC using their loss 
estimates for each scenario and then recommend ed the amount of capital the company 
needed to raise to remain adequately capitalized at the end of the stress period, even in the 
more adverse scenario (SCAP: Design and Implementation).  
The Fed targeted two capital ratios to determine capital adequacy: banks needed to have a 
Tier 1 capital ratio greater than six percent and a Tier 1 com mon equity ratio greater than 
four percent at the end of 2010. For the denominator of both ratios—risk-weighted assets—
the Fed used banks’ actual balance-sheet figures at the end of 2008, plus any assets they had 
to bring onboard due to accounting adjustments. The Fed used this conservative assumption 
to prevent firms from shrinking their balance sheets to meet the target ratios. “Normally, the 
easiest way to maintain a required capital ratio in a downturn is to pull back from lending or 
shed assets—activities that only make a downturn worse” (Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs 2020). 
To calculate the numerators of the two capital ratios, each BHC was required to report  its 
projections of Tier 1 capital and common stockholders’ equity for the end of 2009 and 2010. 
These projections served as a baseline for the recommendations that the government 
assessors would ultimately make to the institutions. In making their recommendations, the 
supervisors looked at the composition of the BHCs’ Tier 1 capital and paid close attention to 
the amount of common equity each firm had, as common equity “generally should be the 
dominant element within Tier 1 capital” (SCAP: Design and Implementation).  
The BHCs that needed to increase their capital levels as a result of the stress tests had 30 
days to develop a plan that , “wherever possible, actively seek(s) to raise new capital from 
private sources”. Once its federal banking regulator approved its plan, a BHC had six months 
to implement it. While the ultimate goal of the SCAP was to ensu re the strength of the US 
banking sector and reduce uncertainty to restore normal market functionality , the US 
government also offered the CAP backstop as a source of government capital if a bank was 
unable to obtain private capital (SCAP: Overview of Results). 
Capital Assistance Program (CAP) 
Treasury officials considered the approach of CAP to be similar to an “open bank resolution.” 
An open bank resolution is essentially a recapitalization. Typically , common equity holders 
900
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
see the value of their shares diluted, in whole or in part ; and existing preferred equity and 
debt investors accept losses or convert their holdings into common equity. But Treasury 
officials wanted to avoid the government taking common equity ownership in banks before 
other opt ions had been exhausted . They viewed common equity ownership as akin to 
nationalization. The government had already taken control of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, 
the two government-sponsored mortgage giants, and AIG, the largest insurance company. So 
they chose mandatorily convertible preferred equity as their instrument. The new securities 
were preferred, like those banks had issued to the Treasury in the earlier CPP program. But, 
unlike those securities, they would be converted into common shares  after seven years if 
they had not been retired (see KDD #9 for more details). They imposed onerous terms – high 
dividends, executive compensation limits, additional warrants, and limits on other dividends 
- to encourage banks to build common equity through other me ans (Clark, Kabaker, and 
Sachs 2020).  
The Treasury and Fed described the CAP as an unlimited capital backstop (Clark, Kabaker, 
and Sachs 2020, UST PR, 02/10/2009). The program had a total capacity of roughly $300 
billion, which officials believed was sufficient to meet any potential needs. That sum included 
about $100 billion in remaining TARP funds, plus the roughly $200 billion in existing CPP 
preferred shares that the Treasury could convert into new CAP preferred shares if needed 
(Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs 2020).  
All publicly traded , US-based banks, thrifts, and their holding companies  (designated as 
Qualifying Financial Institutions, or QFIs) were eligible to apply for CAP funds (CAP: Term 
Sheet; UST PR, 02/10/2009). Institutions could submit their applications to their primary 
federal banking regulator—the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC), Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC),  or Fed . That regulator would then submit its 
recommendations to the Treasury, who had the final  say on which institutions were 
accepted. The deadline for institutions to apply was May 25, 2009 ( CAP: FAQ). In the initial 
term sheet, the Treasury said it was also working on developing application s for unlisted 
institutions, S-corporations, and mutual banks, but it never released those documents (CAP: 
Term Sheet).  
If accepted, QFIs could issue mandatorily convertible preferred equity to the Treasury. The 
Treasury then transferred the instruments to its Financial Stability Trust (CAP: Term Sheet; 
UST PR, 02/10/2009). The objective of this trust was to “protect and create value for the 
taxpayer as a shareholder over time” (FSOB Report, 03/31/2009). A QFI could issue an 
amount of preferred stock equal to no less than 1% but no more than 2% of its risk-weighted 
assets. A QFI needing capital greater than 2% was considered in need of “exceptional 
assistance.” It would be required to submit that request to its federal banking regulator, who 
would then consult with Treasury. The Treasury would potentially subject the recipient to 
additional terms and conditions (CAP: Term Sheet).  
The EESA required the Treasury to publish the name of any institution that issued preferred 
stock under the CAP and the amount it invested in that institution . However, a QFI could 
obtain confidentiality if it was able to “specifically demonstrate the harm (for example, loss 
of competitive position , invasion of privacy) that would result from public release of 
901
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 14 ---
information” (CAP: FAQ). The Treasury did not publicly release the names of applicants that 
it did not approve for the program. 
The Treasury generally modelled the terms of the CAP after its Capital Purchase Program 
(CPP), which it created in October 2008 . The key difference was that CAP preferred equity 
was convertible into common stock  (Convertible Preferred). The Fed focused on common 
equity because it provides much greater loss -absorbing capacity and offers the most 
protection to the more senior parts of the portfolio  (SCAP: Overview of Results) . The 
Convertible Preferred was voluntarily convertible either in part or whole by the QFI  or the 
Treasury any time after the investment ; it would automatically convert after seven years 
(CAP: Term Sheet).5 Some of the characteristics of the Convertible Preferred were subject to 
change based on the outcome of a shareholder vote conducted after the QFI issued the stock. 
QFIs were required to call and pass a shareholder vote to authorize an increase in the 
number of common stock such that the conversion of the Convertible Preferred and exercise 
of the warrants could take place (CAP: Term Sheet).  
Regardless of the method, the Treasury set the conversion price at “90% of the average 
closing price for the common stock for the 20 trading day period e nding February 9, 2009”. 
However, the Treasury could reduce this price by 15% every six months following the initial 
injection if the institution failed to receive the afore-mentioned stockholder approval to 
increase the number of authorized common shares. The maximum price reduction was 45%. 
If any stock remained outstanding after the mandatory conversion date ( seven years), then 
the Treasury was required to make “reasonable efforts” to sell at least 20% of its current 
holdings of common equity every year until it owned no more equity (CAP: Term Sheet).  
The Convertible Preferred paid cumulative dividends of 9%, though this rate could increase 
to 20% six months after the original issue date if the shareholders had still not approved the 
increase in common s hares. If an institution did not pay the required dividends on the 
Convertible Preferred for six quarters, consecutive or not, the Treasury would have the 
ability to elect two directors to the institution’s board. This right would end once the 
institution paid dividends for four consecutive quarters (CAP: Term Sheet).  
The Treasury’s terms limited dividends on non -Treasury common stock to $0.01 as l ong as 
any Convertible Preferred or Treasury -owned common stock remained outstanding . T he 
Treasury also prohibited QFIs from declaring dividends, paying dividends, or repurchasing 
any equivalently ranked or junior preferred shares during this time (CAP: Term Sheet).   
These terms were known as dividend stoppers.  
QFIs could redeem the Convertible Preferred shares by issuing new common equity. To do 
so, they needed the approval of their federal banking regulator . Also, the proceeds of any 
such equity issuance had to equal at least 25% of the issue price of the Convertible Preferred 
 
5 At the time of any conversion, the QFI was also required to pay “any accrued and unpaid dividends at its option 
in either cash or shares of common stock.” These shares would be valued at the closing price on the second 
preceding trading day (CAP: Term Sheet – p. 3). Treasury could also convert the preferred stock “upon specified 
corporate events, including certain sales, mergers or changes of control of the QFI” (CAP: Term Sheet – p. 3). 
902
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
shares. Redemption was done either at par value (plus accrued and unpaid dividends) if done 
within the first two years, or at the greater of par value plus accrued and unpaid dividends if 
the stock had been converted (CAP: Term Sheet CAP).6 
The Treasury could receive additional common stock by exercising the  10-year warrants 
issued with  the Convertible Preferred shares . These warrants, which were immediately 
exercisable, allowed the Treasury to purchase common stock equal to 20% of the amount of 
Convertible Preferred on the day of the initial investment. The exercise price was the same 
as the conversion price in both its original level and thresholds for reduction (15% decrease 
every 6 months , up to 45% ). The Treasury pledged not to exercise any voting power with 
respect to these shares (CAP: Term Sheet).  
Other terms of CAP equity were a lso more onerous than CPP equity. Institutions that 
participated in CAP  faced restrictions on executive compensation . These restrictions were 
originally specified in EESA and changed with the passage of the  ARRA in February 2009 
(UST Report, 06/10/2009). 
Senior executive officers (SEOs), initially defined by EESA as the five highest-paid executives 
of companies that took TARP money, were the primary targets of these restrictions (P.L. 110-
343). The government gradually increased the  number of SEOs that wer e affected. SEOs of 
TARP recipients were generally unable to receive “golden parachute” payments, bonuses , 
and additional compensation. The legislation and subsequent interim final rules  also 
required compensation committees of QFIs to identify features that could “lead SEOs to take 
unnecessary and excessive risks” and meet with risk officers to discuss these features  (UST 
Report, 06/10/2009).  
As mentioned, institutions that were approved to issue Convertible Preferred shares in 
excess of the 2% limit would be classified as needing “exceptional assistance”  (CAP: Term 
Sheet). The Treasury first made t his distinction in its interim guidance in February 2009.  
These firms would be subject to stricter executive compensation and corporate governance 
rules. Such r estrictions would come in the form of harsher limits on compensation, 
“clawback” provisions for any bonus or incentive payments, wider golden parachute bans, 
and broader publication requirements of expenditures that could be viewed as excessive or 
luxury (UST PR, 02/04/2009). Treasury issued its final guidance on executive compensation 
on June 10, 2009 (UST PR, 06/10/2009). See K ey Design Decision No. 12 for more 
information. 
  
 
6 Redemption of preferred stock issued under the Capital Purchase Program initially required it be done via the 
proceeds of a Qualified Equity Offering, or a raising of additional preferred or common equity. This requirement 
was removed after the passage of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (CPP: FAQ 
03/01/2012). 
903
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 16 ---
Outcomes 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) 
The SCAP was deliberately stringent . E stimates of potential losses for the 19 BHCs that 
participated were $600 billion in the more adverse scenario.  Three quarters of these losses 
came from accrual loans, such as residential mortgages and consumer -related loans. Two -
year total loan-loss estimates were 9.1 percent, higher than any point in US history, including 
during the height of the Great Depression  (SCAP: Overview of Results) . See Figure 2 for a 
breakdown of historical two-year loan loss rates.  
The Federal Reserve pointed out that because of the two -year horizon of the SCAP, these 
were not full lifetime losses. Approximately $400 billion in losses had already been realized 
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
At 9.1%, SCAP two-year loan loss rates were 
higher than peak levels during the Great 
Depression.
Figure 2: Historical two-year loan loss rates for commercial banks (%) 
Sources: International Monetary Fund; Federal Reserve; FDIC.  
904
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
by the  19 firms from the third quarter of 2007 to the end of 2008 (SCAP: Design and 
Implementation). The Fed argued that the SCAP captured “a large portion of losses from 
positions held as of the end of 2008”. Total loss-absorbing capacity for the 19 firms was about 
$362.9 billion (SCAP: Overview of Results).  The Fed measured loss -absorbing capacity by 
looking at starting capital, adding any pre -provision net revenues over the period, and 
subtracting the change in the allowance for loan losses. 
The SCAP “capital buffer ,” or the amount of capital needed to ensure that the participants 
would be adequately capitalized under the more adverse scenario, came out to $185 billion 
for 10 of the 19 BHCs. T he other nine did not need additional capital. 7 However, this figure 
was based on the firms’ balance sheets as of December 31, 2008. It did not take into account 
capital that firms raised at the end of 2008, as well as other actions many of the firms took  
in early 2009 to pre-emptively strengthen their balance sheets prior to the release of the 
stress test results. When accounting for these reductions, the Fed reduced its estimate of the 
capital buffer from $185 billion to $75 billion. Most of the buffer needed was in the form of 
common equity, reflecting the Fed’s desire to improve the composition  of banks’ Tier 1 
capital. Two banks were required to raise new Tier 1 capital : GMAC LLC ($9.1 billion) and 
Regions Financial Corp. ($0.4 billion) (SCAP: Overview of Results). 
After the Fed published the results of the SCAP, credit default swap ( CDS) spreads for the 
largest commercial and investment banks fell considerably . Citigroup’s CDS spread peaked 
in April 2009 before falling nearly 300 basis points after the SCAP results were released.  
Capital Assistance Program (CAP) 
Treasury closed CAP on November 9, 2009, six months after the release of the SCAP results.  
The Treasury made n o investments under CAP . Nine of the 10 institutions that failed the 
stress test managed to raise capital  from private sources (FRB PR, 11/09/2009). The only 
institution that needed additional capital and failed to raise it on the market was GMAC. It 
ultimately drew on capital from a different TARP program, the Automotive Industry 
Financial Program (AIFP) , on similar terms as it would have received under CAP . The 
Treasury also converted existing GMAC preferred stock into mandatorily convertible 
preferred stock and common equity to he lp GMAC cover its capital buffer needs  (UST PR, 
11/09/2009; GAO 10-861).   
The other nine SCAP BHCs that failed the stress test were able to raise enough private capital 
to satisfy their SCAP requirements within six months  (FRB PR, 11/09/2009) . One unique 
feature of CAP was that institutions could apply at the end of the stress testing period to 
ensure they would have access  to the funds, but then defer funding for up to six months so 
that the BHCs could attempt “ to raise as much private capital as possible” ( CAP: White 
Paper). Most of the new capital was in the form of common equity , commensurate with the 
SCAP recommendation to improve the quality of Tier 1 capital. Through new share issuance, 
asset sales, and conversions of preferred equity into common equity, these firms raised $76.6 
 
7 The nine firms that passed the stress test were American Express, BB&T, Bank of New York Mellon, Capital 
One, Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan, MetLife, State Street, and US Bancorp  (SCAP: Overview of Results – p. 9).  
905
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 18 ---
billion in common equity in 2009 after the stress test results were released (GAO 10-861). 
In total, SCAP BHCs increased their Tier 1 common equity by more than $200 billion from 
December 31, 2008 to December 31, 2009.8 
According to the Treasury, it did not receive any applications for CAP funding from firms that 
did not participate in the SCAP (TARP Two-Year Retrospective). 
All but one of the 19 SCAP institutions —MetLife—had issued a total of $ 216 billion in 
preferred stock under the government’s Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) before the 
SCAP exercise. Nine of these repaid approximately $66.7 billion in CPP investments on June 
17, 2009 , a little more than a month after the  SCAP results had  been released  (CPP 
Transaction Data) .9 For a full accounting of capital actions from 2007 through 2010, see 
Figure 3. For more information on private capital raises by individual SCAP banks after the 
stress tests, see Figure 4. 
 
8 This figure includes common equity raised and retained earnings. 
9 The nine SCAP BHCs that repaid their CPP investments  were Bank of New York Mellon ($3 billion), Goldman 
Sachs ($10 billion), JP Morgan ($25 billion), Morgan Stanley ($10 billion), State Street ($2 billion), BB&T ($3.1 
billion), Capital One ($3.6 billion), American Express ($3.4 billion), and US Bancorp ($6.6 billion). 
$45 
$20 
$90 
$65 
$67 
$227 
$7 
$20 
$202 
$44 
$7 
$15 
$10 
$155 
$382 $416 
$541 $339 
$75 
 $-
 $100
 $200
 $300
 $400
 $500
 $600
Pre-TARP
TARP (14-Oct-
08) Pre-SCAP Post-SCAP
TARP
Redemption
(2Q09 - 4Q10)
SCAP
Requirements
Tier 1 Common Preferred Other Tier 1
Figure 3: SCAP Bank Capital Actions from Q1 2007 to Q4 2010 ($ billions) 
Source: Goldman Sachs. 
Note: These calculations do not include capital raised by MetLife, Inc., or any conversions of preferred to common 
equity. The $227 billion in TARP capital includes amounts raised under the Capital Purchase Progra m (CPP) and 
Targeted Investment Program (TIP). The TARP figure also includes approximately $10.1 billion that Ally Financial 
(GMAC) raised after the stress tests had been concluded. 
906
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 19 ---
$0.0
$0.5
$1.0
$1.0
$1.9
$2.1
$2.3
$2.5
$2.8
$3.6
$3.7
$3.8
$4.1
$6.9
$7.4
$9.8
$20.9
$25.4
$32.8
$0.0 $5.0 $10.0 $15.0 $20.0 $25.0 $30.0 $35.0
Goldman Sachs
American Express
Fifth Third Bank
Key Corp
SunTrust
Regions Financial
State Street
GMAC
Bank of New York Mellon
Capital One
BB&T
U.S. Bancorp
PNC Financial Services
Morgan Stanley
MetLife
JPMorgan Chase
Wells Fargo
Citigroup
Bank of America
Common Equity
Preferred Equity
Other Tier 1
Sources: MetLife: 2009 - 2010 Quarterly Reports; all others: Goldman Sachs. 
Figure 4: Post-SCAP Private Capital Raised by SCAP Banks (May 7, 2009 – December 31, 
2009, $ billions) 
907
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 20 ---
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a package: The SCAP and CAP were announced as part of the government’s 
Financial Stability Plan, which also included an expansion of consumer and 
business lending, a public -private investment fund , and housing support and 
foreclosure prevention initiatives.  
The Treasury released the Financial Stability Plan on February 10, 2009 , to “address the 
uncertainty, troubled assets and capital constraints of our financial institutions as well as the 
frozen secondary markets that have been the source of around half of our lending for 
everything from small business loans to auto loans” ( UST PR, 02/10/2009 ). The plan had 
several components: 
(1) The Financial Stability Trust. The comprehensive stress test, which  would later become 
the SCAP, and the Capital Assistance Program (CAP) were core features of this piece of the 
Plan. All investments  made under CAP  would have been placed into a separate Financial 
Stability Trust, which was specifically designed to manage the government’s investments 
(UST PR, 02/10/2009). 
(2) Public-Private Investment Fund. This fund was designed to purchase legacy assets from 
distressed institutions with the goal of soliciting private investors to co -invest with the 
government. The Treasury aimed for it to include a public -private financing component of 
$500 billion, with the potential to go up to $1 trillion, and private -sector pricing of assets ; 
however, it was marginally used and Treasury committed only about $18.6 billion to the 
program, receiving a net positive return of about $3.9 billion (PPIP Quarterly Report: 
September 2013; UST PR, 02/10/2009). 
(3) Consumer & Business Lending Initiative. This was a joint venture of the Treasury and Fed 
designed to unfreeze key secondary markets, specifically by expanding the capacity of the 
not-yet-implemented Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). Treasury and the 
Fed set the maximum size of TALF at $1 trillion ; usage ultimately peaked at $ 49 billion 
(FRBNY: TALF 101; UST PR, 02/10/2009). 
(4) Transparency, Accountability, Monitoring , and Conditions. With this new plan, the 
government expected recipients of aid to explain how they were going to use their funds and 
how this new aid would impact their ability to lend. The plan also included l imits on 
executive compensation  and on  common stock dividends, repurchases, and cash mergers  
(UST PR, 02/10/2009). 
(5) Housing Support and Foreclosure Prevention. Treasury pledged $50 billion to help 
middle-class homeowners reduce their monthly mortgage payments. Additionally, the 
government committed to “establishing loan modification guidelines and standards for 
government and private programs ,” as well as mandating recipients to participate in 
foreclosure mitigation plans (UST PR, 02/10/2009). 
908
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 21 ---
(6) Small Business and Community Lending. Small Business Administration (SBA) lending, 
which had declined by 57  percent from the first quarter of 2008, was addressed. The 
administration’s Small Business and Community Bank Lending Initiative financed the 
purchase of triple-A-rated SBA loans, increased the guarantee of said loans to 90  percent, 
reduced SBA lending fees, and streamlined the application process to encourage lending 
(UST PR, 02/10/2009). 
The announcement of the plan was the first time the Treasury released details about SCAP 
and CAP . It released the terms and conditions of the program on February 2 5 ( UST PR, 
02/10/2009; UST PR, 02/25/2009 ). The SCAP was widely publicized , with the goal of 
reducing uncertainty and restoring confidence in the 19 BHCs that were tested. The CAP was 
a government backstop to recapitalize BHCs if they were unable to raise funds on private 
capital markets within six months (SCAP: Design and Implementation). 
2. Legal authority: Congress passed the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act on 
October 3, 2008 . EESA gave the Secretary of the Treasury authority to purchase 
troubled assets “from any institution” and served as the legal basis for CAP.  
Legal authority for the Capital Assistance Program came from Section 101 of the Emergency 
Economic Stabilization Act (EESA) of 2008, which Congress passed on October 3, 2008. 
Section 101 states that, “The [Secretary of the Treasury] is authorized to establish the 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (or “TARP”) to purchase, and to make and fund commitments 
to purchase, troubled assets from any financial institution…”(P.L. 110 -343). The Treasury 
and Federal Reserve ultimately decided to invest directly in the capital structu re of banks 
rather than purchase assets off their balance sheets. Its first TARP program was the Capital 
Purchase Program, announced in October (SIGTARP 10/05/2009).  
The Treasury later use d this authority to make more targeted injections in AIG, Bank of 
America, and Citigroup (SIGTARP 10/05/2009). This same authority formed the legal basis 
for CAP in February. See Figure 5 for a comparison of capital instruments used in these two 
facilities. 
  
909
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 5: Capital Design Elements of the Capital Purchase Program and the Capital 
Assistance Program 
 Capital Purchase Program (CPP) Capital Assistance Program (CAP) 
Purpose Encourage banks to accept government capital 
to stabilize balance sheets and increase the flow 
of financing to U.S. businesses and consumers  
Incentivize banks to raise common equity through 
the private sector and serve as a backstop for 
government capital to help absorb larger than 
expected future losses  
Type Preferred stock  Mandatorily convertible preferred stock  
Term Perpetual life Mandatory conversion to common stock after 7 
years. Optionally convertible by QFI or Treasury at 
price equal to 90% of avg. common stock price in 
20 trading days ending on February 9, 2009 
Total size $250 billion  Unlimited 
Individual 
participation 
limits 
Must issue an amount equal to not less than 1% 
of RWA and not more than the lesser of $25 
billion or 3% of RWA 
Must issue an amount equal to not less than 1% of 
RWA and not more than 2% of RWA 
Dividends 5% for first five years 
9% after first five years 
9% if shareholder consent received  
20% if consent not received 
Redemption At par via proceeds of Qualified Equity Offering 
during first 3 years 
No restrictions after 3 years10 
Only done via issuance of new common equity 
At par for first 2 years 
Redeemable at greater of par and as-converted 
value 
Treasury voting 
rights 
Right to elect two directors if dividends are not 
paid for six quarters 
Right to elect two directors if dividends are not 
paid for six quarters 
Warrants11 10 year 
Purchase of common stock equal to 15% of 
original gov’t investment amount 
Reduced by half if QFI had repaid Treasury by 
12/31/09.  
Price reduced by 15% every six months (max of 
45%) if shareholder consent not received 
10 year 
Purchase of common stock equal to 20% of original 
gov’t investment amount 
Price reduced by 15% every six months (max of 
45%) if shareholder consent not received 
 
10 A Qualified Equity Offering was the sale by the holder of CPP capital of common stock or “qualifying perpetual 
preferred stock” for cash. This requirement was removed with the passage of ARRA in February 2009, and 
redemptions could be done any time (CPP: Term Sheet; CPP: FAQ 03/01/2012). 
11 “Shareholder consent,” in the cont ext of this table, is defined as a pre -emptive vote undertaken by the 
shareholders of a QFI after receiving either CPP or CAP assistance to authorize an additional amount of common 
stock so that the exercise of the warrants and the conversion of the preferred equity (for CAP participants) can 
be done. If this consent is not obtained, then the terms generally become harsher (CPP: Term Sheet – p. 5; CAP: 
Term Sheet – p. 8). 
910
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 23 ---
Executive 
compensation 
Applied to top 5 highest-paid executives 
Limits on compensation; encouraged clawbacks 
if bonuses/incentives were granted based on 
materially inaccurate documents; prohibitions 
of golden parachutes  
Applied to top 5 highest-paid executives and the 
next 20 highest-paid employees 
 Bonus payments limited to one-third of total 
compensation 
Total annual compensation limited to $500,000 
except in the case of restricted stock awards 
Mandated clawback provisions. Required annual 
shareholder vote to approve executive 
compensation packages  
Dividend 
stoppers 
No dividends, repurchases, or redemption of 
common, junior preferred, or preferred shares 
ranking pari-passu unless all dividends 
(accrued and unpaid) for all past periods had 
been paid. 
No dividends, repurchases, or redemption of 
common, junior preferred, or preferred shares 
ranking pari-passu unless all dividends (accrued 
and unpaid) for all past periods had been paid 
Restriction on 
use of proceeds 
No specific requirements Institutions must submit a plan detailing how they 
would use the additional capital to “preserve and 
strengthen” their lending capacity 
Usage $205 billion to 707 banks and trusts Not used 
Sources: CPP: Term Sheet; CAP: Term Sheet: CAP. 
3. Communication: The Treasury communicated that both the stress tests and 
government backstop were key parts of its financial stability plan, citing their 
desire to ensure the ability of institutions to  continue lending at normal levels  
even during a more severe economic decline. 
In its February 10, 2009, press release, the Treasury said that the stress tests would identify 
the capital buffer banks needed to remain well  capitalized in an adverse scenario . It said it 
would make government funds available through CAP to build that buffer. But it emphasized 
that banks would “be encouraged to access private markets to raise any additional capital 
needed to establish [the capital] buffer” rather than using CAP. Treasury framed CAP as a 
temporary facility , “a bridge to private capital until market conditions norm alized”. The 
government capital instruments would be convertible to common equity  “if needed to 
preserve lending in a worse-than-expected economic environment”. The announcement also 
stipulated that any investments made under CAP would be “placed in a sepa rate entity set 
up to manage the government’s investments in US financial institutions” ( UST PR, 
02/10/2009).  
In its more detailed announcement on February 25, Treasury issued (1) a white paper 
detailing the reasons for establishing such a facility as wel l as a broad overview of key 
elements, (2) the official term sheet that bank  holding companies would use to apply  to the 
program, and (3) a list of frequently asked questions (FAQs) to help increase understanding 
of the program ( UST PR, 02/25/2009 ). The Treasury expanded on its description of the 
program on February 25 in a few distinct ways. 
911
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 24 ---
The original plan did not specify what Treasury expected the banks that received CAP capital 
to do with it, only stating that “the CAP instrument should improve confidence and increase 
the willingness of financial institutions to lend”. In the February 25 release, however, the 
expected usage was much clearer, with Treasury requiring any applicant to “submit a plan 
for how they intend to use this capital to preserve and strengthen their lending capacity”. 
Specifically, Treasury desired applicants to increase their lending relative to what they 
would have been able to do without government capital. These plans would be made public 
by Treasury once government equity under t he CAP had been obtained  (UST PR, 
02/25/2009).  
The “separate entity” that would hold the government’s investments was further explained 
in the white paper that Treasury released. Treasury stated that all investments made under 
CAP would be put in a separate trust that would manage the government’s investments, and 
that the trustees’ primary objective was to “protect and create value for the taxpayer as a 
shareholder over time”. This was done to reinforce Treasury’s goal of keeping any period of 
government investment “as temporary as possible” (CAP: White Paper). 
The names of applicants would not be published. However, for any completed transactions, 
the name of the bank and the amount invested would be published within 48 hours of the 
investment. Applicants could request portions of the application be treated confidentially if 
they could “specifically demonstrate the harm (for example, loss of competitive position, 
invasion of privacy) that would result from public release of information” (CAP: FAQ).  
In the case of the SCAP, the Federal Reserve released a detailed report to the public on April 
24, 2009, on the design of the stress test. The Fed said the purpose of the report was to “assist 
analysts and other interested members of the public in und erstanding the results of the 
[SCAP]” (FRB PR, 04/24/2009). This report was released shortly after the test had 
concluded, and the results were released on May 7 (SCAP: Overview of Results). 
In a speech on May 11, 2009 , at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlan ta, Fed chairman Ben 
Bernanke stated that all agencies involved aimed to be as transparent as possible (Bernanke, 
05/11/2009). There was, however, much internal debate among officials about how 
transparent the government ought to be about communicating the results of the stress tests. 
While there were regulators that wished to make many details of the tests public, doing so 
“ran counter to decades of a banking supervision philosophy that extolled the virtues of 
confidentiality”. Some regulators believed that too much transparency could be destabilizing 
by singling out “weaker” banks, which could lead to the very bank runs the SCAP was trying 
to prevent.  In the end, the Federal Reserve agreed to a policy of transparency so the public 
could “decide for themselves [if the] stress test was sufficiently rigorous and credible (Clark, 
Kabaker, and Sachs 2020). 
On May 6, the day before the official release, the Fed, Treasury, FDIC, and OCC released a joint 
statement that previewed the SCAP results. The agencies explained that the tests were not 
only about the quantity of Tier 1 capital but its quality (FRB PR, 05/06/2009 ). The SCAP, 
they said, was “ by design” more stringent than a traditional solvency test  (SCAP: Overview 
of Results). As a result, any additional capital that the BHCs would need as a result of the 
912
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 25 ---
tests did not indicate inadequate capitalization, but was to provide an additional buffe r in 
the event that a more pronounced recession occurred ( FRB PR, 05/06/2009 ). The 
government also explained that any BHCs that needed additional capital would be required 
to submit a capital raising plan and would have six months to implement it (SCAP: Overview 
of Results).  
After the release of the SCAP results on May 7, CDS spreads for the six major bank holding 
companies, as well as the Libor -OIS spread, fell dramatically.  Several of the largest 
participants in the Capital Purchase Program were also able to repay the government’s 
investment in J une. See K ey Design Decision No. 7 for more details on the impacts of the 
SCAP, and Figure 6 for historical bank CDS spreads during this time. 
Investors remained concerned about bank solvency in early 2009, despite the extraordinary 
efforts prior to the SCAP by the FDIC, Treasury, and Fed  to recapitalize banks and restore 
confidence. The focus of those concerns had shifted. While banks’ early losses during the 
financial crisis had resulted largely from exposures to subprime mortgages and complex 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Citi
Goldman
BOFA
Morgan Stanley
Wells Fargo
JP Morgan
May 7, 2009 - Results 
from the Supervisory 
Capital Assessment 
Program (SCAP) are 
Figure 6: Five-Year CDS Spreads for Six Large Bank Holding Companies (basis points) 
Source: Bloomberg. 
913
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 26 ---
credit products, the concerns in 2009 largely stemmed from more traditional credit risks, 
such as “rising delinquencies on prime as well as subprime mortgages, unpaid credit card 
and auto loans, worsening conditions in commercial real estate markets, and increased rates 
of corporate bankruptcy”. Acc ording to Bernanke, the SCAP was designed to measure the 
impact of high expected loan loss rates  and to address the uncertainty around the extent of 
these expected loss rates  in the event of more adverse economic conditions (Bernanke, 
5/11/2009). 
4. Governance: Section 104 of EESA established the Financial Stability Oversight 
Board (FSOB), which monitored the activities of the CAP and other TARP 
programs; the Congressional Oversight Panel  (COP), which provided public 
accountability for Treasury’s use of TARP a uthority; and the Special Inspector 
General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program (SIGTARP), which was the principal 
oversight authority.  
Section 104 of EESA established the Financial Stability Oversight Board (FSOB) to review the 
policies implemented under section 101. These policies included reviewing “the 
appointment of financial agents, the designation of asset classes to be purchased, a nd plans 
for the structure of vehicles used to purchase troubled assets”. The FSOB was also 
responsible for examining the effects that programs made under Section 101 had on 
“assisting American families in preserving home ownership, stabilizing financial m arkets, 
and protecting taxpayers” (P.L. 110-343). 
The Board had the following members: 
(1)  The Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
(2)  The Secretary of the Treasury 
(3)  The Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) 
(4)  The Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and 
(5) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
Additionally, the Board was required to report to Congress and the Congressional Oversight 
Panel (COP) at least quarterly to discuss the matters described above (P.L. 110-343).  
The Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or SIGTARP, was 
established through Section 121 of EESA. The Special Inspector General was to be appointed 
by the President and confirmed by the Senate, and was responsible for “coordinat[ing] audits 
and investigations of the purchase, management, and sale of assets by the Secretary of the 
Treasury . . .” (P.L. 110-343).  SIGTARP did this by collecting the following information from 
the Treasury: 
(1) Descriptions of categories of troubled assets purchased. 
(2)  Listings of assets that fell into the aforementioned categories. 
914
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 27 ---
(3) Explanations of the reasons for purchasing said assets.  
(4) Listings of the financial institutions that the troubled assets were purchased from. 
(5) Detailed biographical information about the people hired to manage these troubled 
assets. 
(6) Estimates on the total number and value of troubled assets, how much remained with 
the Treasury, how much had been sold, and the profit or loss incurred from said sales 
(P.L. 110-343). 
According to its mission statement, SIGTARP “is a federal law enforcement agency and is an 
independent watchdog protecting taxpayer dollars that fund TARP” (SIGTARP Annual 
Report – FY 2018). SIGTARP reported to Congress about its supervi sory activities twice a 
year, audited various TARP programs, and conducted and reported on investigations of 
misconduct for TARP recipients (SIGTARP – Official Website). SIGTARP’s quarterly reports 
generally consisted of assessments of various components o f the program, such as the CPP, 
as well auto and housing industry support programs (SIGTARP April 2010). SIGTARP reports 
included detailed recommendation sections, informed by the audits and investigations it 
conducted, and also provided detailed tables of  the implementation status of each of these 
recommendations (SIGTARP July 2014).  
The COP was another crucial component of TARP oversight. Created on the same day that 
TARP was passed, COP’s primary functions were to:  
(1)  Oversee Treasury’s actions; 
(2)  Assess the impact of spending to stabilize the economy; 
(3)  Evaluate market transparency; 
(4)  Ensure effective foreclosure mitigation efforts; and 
(5) Guarantee that Treasury’s actions are in the best interest of the American people 
(COP  – About Us). 
In its approximately two and a half years of operation, the COP heard testimony from high-
level officials and published 30 reports on the impacts of TARP initiatives. The Panel asked 
questions about the more immediate, stabilizing effects of TARP, as well as longer-term 
impacts, such as how TARP recipients were structuring their business and policies after 
receiving aid (COP December 2008). Its reports examined, for example, the government 
support to specific firms like GMAC and AIG and the effectiveness of the SCAP stress testing 
methodology (COP – Reports).  
The COP was disbanded on April 3, 2011 , after releasing its final report. In it, the Panel 
explained that, while TARP alone was not responsible for the economic recovery, “TARP 
quelled the immediate panic  and helped to avert an even more severe crisis” (COP March 
2011). This final report had few comments on SCAP and CAP.  
915
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 28 ---
Program Size: CAP was intended to be an unlimited capital backstop ; it had a total capacity 
of roughly $300 billion. CAP was intended to  be an unlimited capital backstop for the 
financial sector (Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs 2020 ; UST PR, 02/10/2009). The program was 
estimated to have a total  capacity of roughly $300 billion, which officials believed was 
sufficient to meet any potential needs (see Funding Source KDD).  
5. Size, Funding Source: CAP was funded via Congressional appropriations 
authorized for Treasury’s use under the Troubled Assets Relief Program. 
Congress authorized a total of $700 billion of TARP funds that could be “outstanding at any 
one time .” However, Congress originally allowed only $250 billion to be outstanding ; it 
required the president to return to Congress with a report asking to disburse the remaining 
funds, should they be necessary (P.L. 110-343).12 This authority lasted until October 3, 2010, 
or two years after the date of the passage of EESA. After this point, Treasury was not able to 
make new commitments under TARP (TARP Two-Year Retrospective). The Dodd-Frank Wall 
Street Reform and Consumer Protection A ct, passed on July 21, 2010, reduced this original 
commitment from $700 billion to $475 billion (P.L. 111 -203). See Key Design Decision No. 
15 for more information on Dodd-Frank. 
However, the unlimited nature of CAP meant there was some uncertainty around how much, 
if any, capital the government would need to provide. Fed and Treasury officials, in a paper 
published later, estimated that the program had a total capacity of roughly $300 billion. That 
sum included about $100 billion in appropriated but still uncommitted TARP funds, plus the 
roughly $200 billion in existing CPP preferred shares that the Treasury could convert into 
new CAP preferred shares if needed (Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs 2020).  
In hindsight, those officials wrote, the level that the govern ment had committed “was 
sobering—we were committing the government to buy an indeterminate amount of common 
stock in the banking system at a fixed price” ( Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs  2020). However, 
even the most extreme scenarios under SCAP determined the c apital buffer to be far less 
than the remaining amount of TARP funds available . TARP would have had sufficient funds 
to cover the entire $185 billion capital buffer that SCAP had identified if the 10 BHCs that 
failed the stress test had been unable to rais e funds from other sources .13 However, it was 
not known at the time how much TARP money would be available to finance the SCAP buffer, 
as many of the programs were still being developed and funds had been committed to other 
programs. 
6. SCAP-eligible institutions: Federal banking regulators required all bank holding 
companies with risk -weighted assets of more than $100 billion to perform 
 
12 The phrase “ou tstanding at any one time ,” which implicitly allowed the government to re -use TARP funds, 
was removed with the passage of Dodd-Frank in July 2010.  
13 Total disbursements under TARP were approximately $441.8 billion, which was far less than the initial $700 
billion appropriated in the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (TARP Tracker). 
916
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 29 ---
forward-looking “stress -tests” under the Supervisory Capital Assessment 
Program to determine their capital needs.  
The US government assessed the capital needs of the banking system through the 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, a forward -looking stress test of the 19 largest 
BHCs under a set of stringent economic scenarios. Each of the BHCs had risk-weighted assets 
of more than $100 billion.14 These firms were picked because of their significance in the 
credit intermediation process,  the fact that they collectively held “two -thirds of the assets 
and more than one-half of the loans in the US banking system”, and in the case of State Street 
and Bank of New York Mellon, their significance as the two largest custody banks.  Teams of 
examiners, led by those at the Federal Reserve , “appl[ied] a consistent and systematic 
approach across the group to evaluate the projected  loss and resource estimates submitted 
by the firms” (SCAP: Design and Implementation). 
The SCAP was deliberately stringent . T his allowed the Fed to “[counter] the risk that 
uncertainty itself exerts contractionary pressures on the banking system and the economy” 
(SCAP: Overview of Results). The goal of the tests was to ensure that, even in the event of a 
significant deterioration i n the US economy, these critically important BHCs would remain 
adequately capitalized  and able to lend at their normal levels (FRB PR, 05/06/2009) . In 
order to assess these needs, federal regulators estimated losses on a variety of securities and 
loans for 2009 and 2010. It also calculated loan loss reserves at the end of 2010 at levels that 
the regulators believed would “captur[e] expected losses in 2011” ( SCAP: Design and 
Implementation). 
The Federal Reserve crafted two economic scenarios, the “baseline” and “more adverse”  
scenarios. In both cases, the Fed projected changes in real GDP, the civilian unemployment 
rate, and house prices over 2009–10. “The baseline scenario was intended to represent a 
consensus view about the depth and duration of the recessi on,” and was based on the 
average of economic projections published by the February releases of forecasts from three 
major economic forecasting surveys: Consensus Forecasts, the Blue Chip survey, and the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters (SCAP: Design and Implementation).15  
The more adverse scenario did not average the consensus expectations of a variety of 
forecasters. Rather, it “was constructed from the historical track record of private 
forecasters as well as their current assessments of uncertainty”. The Fed focused specifically 
on “subjective probability assessments” from these organizations  to gauge the probability  
that the aforementioned inputs (GDP growth, unemployment, house prices) would be even 
more affected than the general consensus used in the baseline scenario. Despite the dramatic 
differences from the baseline, the more adverse scenario was not a “worst-case” scenario, as 
the Fed argued that the conditions of the stress test ought to be “severe but plausible” (SCAP: 
 
14 Despite this being one of the criteria for BHCs under SCAP, one of the firms —State Street—had only $69.6 
billion in risk-weighted assets. See Table 1 for more information on SCAP BHCs. 
15 House prices were measured by the fourth -quarter year -over-year change of the Case -Shiller 10 -City 
Composite Index (SCAP: Design and Implementation – p. 6). 
917
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 30 ---
Design and Implementation). See Figure 7 for the estimates associated with the baseline and 
more adverse scenarios.  
Figure 7: SCAP Baseline and More Adverse Economic Scenarios (percent) 
Real GDP    2008 – 2009 2009 – 2010 
Average baseline –2.0 2.1 
More adverse –3.3 0.5 
Civilian unemployment rate    
Average baseline 8.4 8.8 
More adverse 8.9 10.3 
House prices    
Baseline –14 –4 
More adverse –22 –7 
Source: SCAP: Design and Implementation – p. 6. 
The BHCs were instructed to estimate losses that were due to failure to pay obligations 
rather than those due to mark -to-market accounting (SCAP: Design and Implementation). 
This judgment was based on what some Treasury officials at the time  called the theory of 
special bank relativity. This theory pushed back on the general standard of mark -to-market 
accounting by suggesting that banks exist through time and shouldn’t be judged based on 
how they stand during the lowest point in a cycle. Forcing the banks to do this, some argued, 
would “undermine a key  reason [why] they are so important for supporting economic 
activity in the first place” (Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs 2020). 
Each BHC was “asked to estimate their potential losses on loans, securities, and tradin g 
positions, as well as pre-provision net revenue (PPNR) and the resources available from the 
allowance for loan and lease losses”. BHCs with large enough trading accounts ($100 billion 
in assets or more) were required to provide additional loss estimates in the adverse scenario 
that factored in counterparty credit risk. 16 BHCs calculated t hese loss estimates on their 
 
16 Counterparty credit risk was measured by assessing the risk of a counterparty defaulting, as well as potential 
credit valuation adjustments that would be made against exposures to counterparties who were more likely to 
default under the more adverse scenario. 
918
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 31 ---
trading books and counterparty exposures using internal stress tests based on market prices 
on February 20, 2009 (SCAP: Design and Implementation).  
Banks projected losses over two years. The Federal Bank of New York (FRBNY) provided loss 
ranges for 12 different types of loans and securities, such as first- and second-lien mortgages, 
commercial and industrial (C&I) loans, and credit card loans. Banks could provide 
alternative loss estimates from what FRBNY gave them , but they were then required to 
provide “strong supporting evidence, especially if they fell below the range minimum”. To 
ensure more accuracy, the BHCs were encouraged to provide additional information, such as 
loss projections on subcategories within the 12 that the Fed selected. The categories of loans 
were chosen to make the results easier to compare across firms  and to compare with what 
the BHCs had f iled with their federal regulator (SCAP: Design and Implementation).  The 
categories of loans, as well as some of the variables that the examiners used when conducting 
the evaluations, can be found in Figure 8. 
  
919
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 8: Description of SCAP Loan Types and Variables Evaluated by Assessors 
Loans Variables evaluated 
First-lien mortgages (1) Type of product 
(2) Loan-to-value (LTV) ratio 
(3) FICO score 
(4) Geography 
(5) Level of documentation 
(6) Year of origination 
(7) Other variables 
Prime 
Alt-A 
Subprime 
 
Second-/Junior-lien mortgages 
Closed-end junior liens 
HELOCs 
C&I loans (1) Distribution of exposures, by industry 
(2) Internal ratings provided by the BHCs 
(3) Expected default rates from third parties 
 
CRE loans (1) Property type 
(2) Loan-to-value (LTV) ratio 
(3) Debt service coverage ratio (DSCR) 
(4) Geography 
(5) Loan maturity 
 
Construction 
Multifamily 
Nonfarm, Non-residential 
Credit cards (1) FICO score 
(2) Payment and utilization rates 
(3) Geographic concentration 
Other consumer (1) FICO score 
(2) Loan-to value (LTV) ratio 
(3) Term and vehicle age 
(4) Geographic concentration 
Other loans (1) Loss record over the previous 5 years 
Source: SCAP: Design and Implementation - pp. 12 - 13, 18. 
920
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 33 ---
Estimated loss rates were calculated using a variety of methods. For residential mortgages, 
for example, the agencies built default models based on information about individual and 
regional loan portfolios and mortgages. For other consumer loans and commercial loans, the 
agencies conducted regressions of historical default data against several macroeconomic 
variables, such as the unemployment rate. The regulators also had to address the 
heterogeneity across firms that wo uld affect their performance in these tests. To this end, 
they collected additional firm -specific data, such as “past performance, portfolio 
composition, origination vintage, borrower characteristics, geographic distribution, 
international operations, and business mix” (SCAP: Design and Implementation). Cumulative 
loan-loss rates under the more adverse scenario were 9.1 percent, which was higher than 
the banking industry had ever experienced, even at the height of the Great Depression (SCAP: 
Overview of Results).  Figure 9 compares the l oan-loss rates under the baseline and more 
adverse scenarios to the actual loss rates the industry experienced in 2009. 
Figure 9: Two-Year Loss Rates for SCAP Scenarios and 2009 Actual Loss Rates 
(percent) 
 SCAP Loss range Estimates 2009 Actual Loss Rates 
Assets Baseline More adverse SCAP BHC avg. Industry avg. 
First-lien mortgages 5 – 6 7 – 8.5 1.9 1.7 
Prime 1.5 – 2.5 3 – 4 N/A 0.5 
Alt-A 7.5 – 9.5 9.5 – 13 N/A 3.6 
Subprime 15 – 20 21 – 28 N/A 6.2 
Second-/Junior-Lien 
Mortgages 
9 – 12 12 – 16 4.4 3.9 
Closed-end junior liens 18 – 20 22 – 25 7.5 6.6 
HELOCs 6 – 8 8 – 11 3.6 3.1 
C&I loans 3 – 4 5 – 8 2.5 2.3 
CRE 5 – 7.5 9 – 12 2.3 2.4 
Construction 8 – 12 15 – 18 5.8 6.1 
Multifamily 3.5 – 6.5 10 – 11 1.1 1.1 
Nonfarm, non-residential 4 – 5 7 – 9 0.9 0.8 
Credit cards 12 – 17 18 – 20 10.1 10.2 
Other consumer 4 – 6 8 – 12 4.1 4.4 
Other loans 2 - 4 4 - 10 1.4 1.1 
Sources: SCAP: Overview of Results – p. 5; GAO 10-861 – p. 17. 
921
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 34 ---
BHCs were also required to provide projections of their resources to absorb losses, including 
their pre-provision net revenues ( PPNR) and their allowance for loan losses over the same 
horizon. In the case of SCAP, PPNR was defined as “the income after non -credit-related 
expenses that would flow into firms before they take provisions or other write -downs or 
losses” (SCAP: Design and Implementation; FRB: Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses ). All 
told, more than 150 federal employees were involved in the creat ion, organization, and 
administration of the SCAP (SCAP: Design and Implementation).  
When determining a BHC’s capital needs, the regulators looked at both the amount of Tier 1 
capital and its composition.17 Tier 1 common equity , the first element of Tier 1 capital to 
absorb losses, was seen by the Fed as what should be “the dominant component” of Tier 1 
capital (SCAP: Design and Implementation). Common equity “gives a BHC greater permanent 
loss absorption capacity and a greater ability to conserve resources under stress by changing 
the amount and timing of dividends and other distributions” (SCAP: Overview of Results).  
The Fed considered two key questions when evaluating the capital needs of each of the BHCs 
under the more adverse scenario:  
(1) How much additional Tier 1 capital would a BHC need today to have a Tier 1 ratio of 
greater than 6 percent at the end of 2010? 
(2) How much additional Tier 1 common equity capital would a BHC need today to have 
a Tier 1 common equity ratio of greater than 4 percent at the end of 2010? 
These capital thresholds were known as the “6 -4 rule .” The regulators used them to 
determine the SCAP buffer—the amount of additional capital the 19 BHCs needed to remain 
well-capitalized even under the more adverse scenario. Nine firms already met the 6-4 rule. 
The other 10 firms needed a total of $185 billion in additional capital to meet the rule. Their 
SCAP buffer needs ranged from as high as $92.6 billion for Citigroup and as low as $2.3 billion 
for PNC. Most of the SCAP buffer needs were due to insufficient common equity. Tier 1 capital 
numbers for most banks were within acceptable limits under the more adverse scenario. 
Only two banks —GMAC LLC and Regions Financial Corp. —had insufficient Tier 1 capital. 
Due to the emphasis on common equity, the Fed concluded that the 10 firms that needed to 
raise additional equity “had capital structures that [were] too strongly tilted to ward capital 
other than common equity” (SCAP: Overview of Results).  
However, the $185 billion figure did not consider capital that firms had raised at the end of 
2008, as well as other actions many of the firms had taken to pre-emptively shore up their 
balance sheets prior to the release of the results. The most noteworthy of these was 
Citigroup, which reduced its SCAP buffer by $87.1 billion through preferred stock exchanges 
 
17 Tier 1 capital is composed of qualifying common stockholders’ e quity, qualifying noncumulative perpetual 
preferred stock and senior perpetual preferred stock issued to the Treasury under TARP, certain minority 
interests and trust preferred securities (SCAP: Design and Implementation).   
922
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 35 ---
and other actions.18  Other banks increased their equity in this period by lesser amounts. By 
the time the results had been released, the original $185 billion, which was based on the 
firms’ balance sheets as of December 31, 2008, had been reduced to $74.6 billion (SCAP: 
Overview of Results). See Figure 10 for the adjusted SCAP requirements of the 10 firms. 
BHCs that had SCAP buffer needs were required to subm it capital plans to their primary 
regulator within 30 days. BHCs would have six months to implement these plans and were  
“encouraged to design capital plans that, wherever possible, actively seek to raise new 
capital from private sources” (SCAP: Overview of Results).   
The 10 BHCs managed to raise $76.6 billion in Tier 1 common equity by November 9, the end 
of the six-month deadline (FRB PR, 11/09/2009). The only institution that needed additional 
capital and failed  to raise it from private investors was GMAC . It ultimately use d the 
 
18 Citi announced a plan to conv ert up to $27.5 billion of its existing preferred stock into common stock on 
February 27, 2009, as well as an agreement with the US government wherein Treasury would match this 
exchange at up to $25 billion of its own preferred stock. By the time the offer s closed at the end of July 2009, 
Citi had raised approximately $58 billion in capital (Citi PR, 02/27/2009; Citi PR, 07/26/2009; SCAP: Overview 
of Results). Additional capital actions, characterized as those transactions that were completed or contracted 
as of the end of 2008, amounted to $29 billion (SCAP: Overview of Results).  
33.9
13.7
11.5
5.5
2.5
2.2
1.8
1.8
1.1
0.6
0 10 20 30 40
Bank of America
Wells Fargo
GMAC
Citigroup
Regions Financial
SunTrust Banks
Morgan Stanley
Key Corp
Fifth Third Bank
PNC Financial Services
Source: SCAP: Overview of Result. 
Figure 10: SCAP Capital Shortfalls ($ billions) 
923
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 36 ---
Automotive Industry Financial Program (AIFP) to help meet the SCAP requirements (UST 
PR, 11/09/2009).  
As a result , no SCAP BHCs drew on the CAP for government capital.  See Figure 11 for a 
breakdown of the Tier 1 ratios of the SCAP BHCs at the end of 2009. 
  
924
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 37 ---
Figure 11: Change in Tier 1 Capital Ratios for SCAP Banks, December 31, 2008 to 
December 31, 2009 
 Tier 1 common capital ratio  Tier 1 risk-based capital ratio 
Bank holding company 2009 (%) Change from 
2008 (bps) 
2009 (%) Change from 
2008 (bps) 
American Express 9.83 13      9.84 14      
Bank of America 7.82 322      10.41 –19      
BB&T 8.50 140      11.48 –82      
Bank of New York 
Mellon 
10.53 103      12.12 –118      
Capital One 10.62 152      13.75 105      
Citigroup 9.77 747      11.67 –23      
Fifth Third 7.00 260      13.31 271      
GMAC 4.85 –155      14.15 405      
Goldman Sachs 12.20 450      14.97 237      
JPMorgan Chase 8.79 229      11.10 90      
KeyCorp 7.50 190      12.75 185      
MetLife 8.17 –33      8.91 –29      
Morgan Stanley 6.71 101      15.30 10      
PNC 6.00 130      11.42 182      
Regions  7.15 55      11.54 114      
State Street 15.59 9      17.74 –246      
SunTrust 7.67 187      12.96 206      
US Bancorp 6.76 166      9.61 –99      
Wells Fargo 6.46 336      9.25 125      
Weighted average 8.31 303 11.31 60 
Source: GAO 10-861. 
925
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 38 ---
7. CAP-eligible institutions: Publicly traded bank holding companies, financial 
holding companies, insured depository institutions, and savings and loan holding 
companies were eligible for CAP.  
BHCs that had SCAP buffer needs were required to submit capital plans to their primary 
regulator within 30 days. BHCs would have si x months to implement these plans and were 
“encouraged to design capital plans that, wherever possible, actively seek to raise new 
capital from private sources”. These could include “restructuring current capital 
instruments, sales of assets, and restricti ons on dividends and stock repurchases” (SCAP: 
Overview of Results). The plans normally had the following elements: 
(1) A description of the specific actions the institution would take to increase the level 
or quality of its capital consistent with the results of the SCAP. 
(2) A list of steps to address any weaknesses for the BHC’s internal evaluations of its 
capital needs and capital planning. 
(3) An outline of the steps the BHC was planning to take to repay all government 
investments received, as well as to reduce reliance on guaranteed debt issued under 
the FDIC guarantee program (FSOB Report, 06/30/2009).  
BHCs with SCAP buffer needs were able to apply to the CAP but defer issuing convertible 
preferred stock to the government via the facility for up to six months wh ile they searched 
for private capital (CAP: White Paper).  
Qualifying financial institutions (QFIs) that did not participate in SCAP were eligible to apply 
voluntarily. They had until May 25, 2009, to apply, though any company applying to become 
a bank holding company had to do so by January 15, 2009, to be eligible for CAP (CAP: FAQ).  
QFIs included any publicly traded US bank or savings association not controlled by a bank 
holding company or a savings and loan company, top -tier US bank holding companies, and 
top-tier US savings and loan companies that “[engage d] solely and predominately in 
activities that are permitted fo r financial holding companies under relevant law”. Banks or 
BHCs that were foreign -owned, or subsidiaries of foreign companies, were not allowed to 
participate. While the term sheet stated that CAP term sheets for privately held banks, S -
corporations, and mutual banks were “expected to be made available,” they never were (CAP: 
Term Sheet).  
8. Individual Participation Limits: CAP specified minimum and maximum 
interventions for individual participating institutions.  
An institution that was accepted into the pr ogram could issue mandatorily convertible 
preferred stock in an amount no less than 1% of its risk -weighted assets, up to a maximum 
926
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 39 ---
of 2%.19 It could submit a request for capital in excess of this amount to its federal banking 
regulator, who would then consult with Treasury. If this was successful, the institution would 
be categorized as needing “exceptional assistance” and would potentially b e subject to 
additional terms and conditions (CAP: Term Sheet).  
9. Capital Characteristics : Institutions participating in the program would issue 
Mandatorily Convertible Preferred Shares, with a mandatory conversion to 
common equity after seven years if the capital had not been repaid.  
Under CAP, the Treasury would purchase mandatorily convertible preferred shares , 
henceforth referred to as Convertible Preferred, in QFIs. Cash received from the issuance of 
these shares could be used to redeem shares under other government investment programs, 
such as the Capital Purchase Program or the Targeted Investment Program ( CAP: Term 
Sheet). Also, government investments made under these programs could be converted into 
Convertible Preferred.  While the Treasury would make all investments under CAP, the 
investments themselves would be managed by a trust set up “to protect and create value for 
the taxpayer as a shareholder over time” (CAP: White Paper).  
Stockholder Consent 
After issuing the Convertible Preferred, QFIs that did not have enough common stock 
authorized to reserve for the conversion and exercise of the warrants were required to call 
a shareholder vote to authorize an increase of the number of common shares so that the 
conversion and exercise could take place if needed. The terms of the capital could change in 
several ways (see below) if this authorization was not obtained in a timely manner  or at all 
(CAP: Term Sheet).  
Conversion 
The Convertible Preferred had both mandatory and optional conversion clau ses as part of 
its structure. The optional conversion gave the issuer of the equity the right to convert  any 
amount of the preferred equity to common stock at any time, subject to regulatory approval. 
The holder of the Convertible Preferred, in this case the Trust created by Treasury, could also 
convert the shares  “upon specified corporate events, including certain sales, mergers or 
changes of control of the QFI”. If a QFI held the Convertible Preferred for longer than seven 
years, the shares would automatically convert to common stock (CAP: Term Sheet). The price 
for conversion was unspecified in the initial Financial Stability Plan. The Treasury said then 
that the price would be “set at a modest discount from the prevailing level of the institution’s 
stock price as of February 9, 2009” (UST PR, 02/10/2009). The term sheet further explained 
that the price would be set at 90 percent of the average of the closing price of the QFI’s 
common stock over the 20 trading day period ending on February 9, 2009. T his price, 
however, would be reduced by 15  percent every six months after the initial injection  if the 
aforementioned stockholder vote to increase the number of common shares did not happen, 
 
19 This was in addition to other Convertible Preferred stock that was to be used to redeem shares under either 
CPP, TIP, or both.  
927
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 40 ---
to a maximum of 45  percent. Conversion would be accompanied by th e repayment of any 
accrued or unpaid dividends, either with cash or common stock  (CAP: Term Sheet ).20 
 
Mandatory Sale 
After the mandatory conversion date, the Treasury was required to “make reasonable 
efforts” to sell at least 20  percent of its outstanding common stock annually. At any point 
after either a mandatory or optional conversion, t he QFI had the option to repurchase the 
common stock held by the government by issuing new common stock or drawing on retained 
earnings. The price of repurchase was the greater of:  
(1)  The conversion price. 
(2)  The market price, calculated based on the average closing price during the 20 
trading day period following the notice of repurchase (CAP: Term Sheet). 
The Treasury made it clear that, despite the poten tial for the government to acquire a large 
interest in an institution, “ US government ownership is not an objective of the CAP” (FSOB 
Report, 03/31/2009). The mandatory sale clause in the term sheet reflected the intention of 
the Treasury to keep the period of government investment “as temporary as possible” (CAP: 
White Paper). 
Dividends. 
The Convertible Preferred paid cumulative dividends of 9 percent, which compounded 
quarterly. This rate would increase to, and remain at, 20 percent six months after the original 
issue date if stockholder consent was not given. So long as any Convertible Preferred  or 
Treasury-owned common stock remained outstanding, the dividends on any common stock 
not held by Treasury could not be greater than $0.01  per share . An addition al “dividend 
stopper” was included in the term sheet. The stopper prevented QFIs from declaring or 
paying dividends on any shares, whether they were pari passu preferred, junior preferred, 
or common, if any dividends on the Convertible Preferred remained outstanding (CAP: Term 
Sheet).   
Repurchases 
Repurchases of other securities, such as junior preferred, pari passu  preferred shares, or 
common shares, were affected by the “dividend stopper”  and thus prohibited if any 
dividends on the Convertible Preferred remained outstanding (CAP: Term Sheet). 
 
 
20 If common shares were used to repay accrued and unpaid dividends, they would be valued “at the closing 
price on the second preceding trading day” (CAP: Term Sheet – p. 3). 
928
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 41 ---
Warrants 
The Convertible Preferred  also included 10-year warrants. These warrants, which were 
immediately exercisable, allowed the Treasury to purchase common stock equal to 20  
percent of the amount of Convertible Preferred on the day of initial investment. The price to 
exercise the warrants was the same as the conversion price. The exercise price would also 
be reduced in 15  percent increments every six months after the initial injection, to a 
maximum of 45 percent if shareholder consent is not gained. While the Treasury would gain 
a larger voting interest in the QFI after exercising the warrants, it pledged not to exercise any 
voting power with respect to these shares ( CAP: Term Sheet).  
 
Redemption 
QFIs were able to redeem the Convertible Preferred “at any time solely with the proceeds of 
one or more issuances of common stock for cash,” so long as they (1) obtained approval from 
their federal banking regulator, and (2) the proceeds of the equity issuances equaled at least 
25 percent of the issue price of the Convertible Preferred. Redemption was done either at 
par value (plus accrued and unpaid dividends)  if done within the first two years, and at the 
greater of par value plus accrued and unpaid dividends an d the as-converted value if done 
after two years (CAP: Term Sheet). 
This meant that  QFIs that  issued Convertible Preferred  had a n implicit  time limit on 
redeeming the shares  because, after two years, the cost of redemption could increase 
dramatically if the QFI’s stock price had increased. The as -converted value of the preferred 
investment would become greater than the par value of the investment, and the QFI would 
have to choose between raising enough common equity to satisfy this increased redemption 
price, continue to pay 9 percent in dividends on the preferred, or convert it to common stock. 
As noted, repurchases of converted stock could be done by issuing new common equity or 
drawing on retained earnings (CAP: Term Sheet).    
10. Loss-sharing: Banks that failed the stress test were required to impose losses on 
existing stakeholders through dilution or debt -for-equity conversions. However, 
Treasury did not provide guidelines describing how banks should do this. 
The Treasury expected institut ions with SCAP capital buffer needs to design their own 
private-sector solution to increase their capital, with CAP funding available as a last resort. 
These solutions could include a mix of debt and preferred equity conversions, asset sales, 
and other mea sures. However, the Treasury did not provide any guidelines for these 
solutions. In a joint statement the day before they released the SCAP results, the Fed, 
Treasury, FDIC, and OCC said that “restructuring current capital instruments” was one of the 
ways that SCAP BHCs could meet their capital needs (FRB PR, 05/06/2009) . Treasury 
officials internally called the program akin to “open bank resolution.” In a typical open bank 
resolution, existing common equity holders see the value of their shares diluted, in whole or 
in part ; and existing preferred equity and debt investors accept losses or convert their 
holdings into common equity. 
929
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 42 ---
Converting junior debtholders to common equity holders through debt-for-equity exchanges 
and other tools “was the preferred path before [the BHCs] sought government capital”. Later, 
Treasury officials said they meant to make clear to junior debtholders that they “should 
expect to bear losses” (Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs 2020).  
The SCAP BHCs already had about $300 billion in debt outstanding through these 
instruments, which suggested to regulators that the y could meet their  SCAP buffer needs 
without finding new equity  investors (Clark, Kabaker, an d Sachs  2020). Figure 1 2 below 
illustrates the capital actions taken by SCAP banks. 
  
930
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 43 ---
Figure 12: Description of Capital Actions by SCAP Bank Holding Companies 
(billions)21 
SCAP BHC Source(s) of capital raised Required SCAP 
capital Buffer  
Capital 
raised22 
Bank of America 
Corporation 
New shares, asset sales, and share 
conversion23 
$33.9 $35.9 
Citigroup, Inc. Share conversion $5.5 $5.6 
Fifth Third Bancorp New shares, asset sales, and share 
conversion 
$1.1 $1.7 
GMAC LLC New shares $11.5 $4.6 
KeyCorp New shares, asset sales, and share 
conversion 
$1.8 $2.3 
Morgan Stanley 
New shares, asset sales, and share 
conversion 
$1.8 $7.0 
PNC Financial Services 
Group, Inc. 
New shares and asset sales $0.6 $1.1 
Regions Financial 
Corporation 
New shares, asset sales, share 
conversion, and internal equity 
raising24 
$2.5 $2.5 
SunTrust Banks, Inc. 
New shares, asset sales, share 
conversion, and internal equity 
raising 
$2.2 $2.2 
 
21 Nine BHCs—American Express Company, BB&T Corporation, Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, Capital 
One Financial Corporation , Goldman Sachs Group, Inc. , JPMorgan Chase & Co. , MetLife, Inc. , State Street 
Corporation, and US Bancorp—were not required to raise SCAP capital because they had sufficient capital to  
withstand a worse-than-expected economic downturn through the end of 2010 and continue to meet the SCAP 
capital buffer targets. 
22 As of November 9, 2009, according to the Federal Reserve. 
23 “New shares” indicates that  a BHC issued new common equity, “asse ts sales” represent business lines or 
products sold to raise cash, and “conversion” shows BHC preferred equity that was converted to common 
equity. 
24 “Internal equity raising” included actions such as sales of equity to  employee stock options plans. 
931
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 44 ---
Wells Fargo & Company New shares and internal equity 
raising 
$13.7 $13.7 
Total  $74.6 $76.6 
Source: GAO Report 10-861. 
11. Control over management: The Treasury’s shares did not have voting rights ; 
however, it had the ability to appoint two directors to the boards of institutions 
that did not pay interest or dividends for six quarters. 
If dividends on the Convertible Preferred stock were not paid for six quarters, consecutive 
or not, then Treasury would have the ability to elect two directors to the board. This right 
ended after dividends had been paid for fou r consecutive quarters ( CAP: Term Sheet). 
Treasury would exercise the voting rights under the Convertible Preferred only in the cases 
of:  
(1) an authorization or issuance of shares senior to the Convertible Preferred  
(2) any amendment to the rights of the Convertible Preferred, or 
(3) any merger, exchange or similar transaction which would adversely affect the rights 
of the Convertible Preferred (CAP: Term Sheet).  
The Treasury retained these voting rights upon conversion to common stock and would 
receive standard vo ting rights associated with the QFI’s common stock. In the event of 
conversion, Treasury would also publish a set of guidelines that explained how it would use 
these voting rights “prior to closing any transactions” (CAP: Term Sheet).  
12. Conditions: Treasury subjected participants to  executive compensation and 
corporation governance restrictions modeled after those originally passed in 
EESA.    
Section 111 of EESA outlines executive compensation restrictions and corporate governance 
standards (P.L. 11 0-343). Specifically, Section 111(b) describes these standards as they 
apply to direct purchases or investments in financial institutions. Section 111(b)(2) specified 
that there would be: 
(1) “limits on compensation that exclude incentives for senior executive officers of a 
financial institution to take unnecessary and excessive risks that threaten the value 
of the financial institution during the period that the Secretary holds an equity or 
debt position in the financial institution; 
(2)  “a provision for  the recovery by the financial institution of any bonus or incentive 
compensation paid to a senior executive officer based on statements of earnings, 
gains, or other criteria that are later proven to be materially inaccurate; and 
(3) “a prohibition on the fina ncial institution making any golden parachute payment to 
932
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 45 ---
its senior executive officer during the period that the Secretary holds an equity or 
debt position in the financial institution” (P.L. 110-343). 
Senior executive officers (SEOs) were initially defined by EESA as the top five highest-paid 
executives of companies that took TARP money (P.L. 110 -343). However, Treasury passed 
several interim final rules that provided additional guidance on executive compensation 
post-EESA, as well (TARP Executive Compensation Rules and Guidance).  
Treasury released additional guidance in an announcement on February 4, 2009 , that 
distinguished between institutions that required “exceptional assistance” and institutions 
participating in “generally available capital access pr ogram[s]” (UST PR , 02/04/2009). 
Treasury specified that institutions that received exceptional assistance included AIG, 
Citigroup, Bank of America, and the two automakers that received TARP support, GM and 
Chrysler (UST PR, 06/10/2009). Institutions that w ere accepted into the CAP did not 
automatically fall under this category, but would if they issued Convertible Preferred in 
excess of the 2 percent limit (CAP: Term Sheet).  
Institutions that required exceptional assistance were subject to stricter requirements. Total 
compensation was restricted to a maximum of $500,000, with any amount in excess required 
to be in the form of restricted stock that vested only after the government had been repaid. 
This was to ensure that the incentives of executives at these  institutions were “aligned with 
both the long-term interests of shareholders as well as minimizing the costs to taxpayers”. 
Golden parachutes, which were defined as large severance agreements for SEOs, were 
completely prohibited for the 10 highest-compensated employees, and capped at one year’s 
compensation instead of three years for the next 25 highest -compensated (UST PR , 
02/04/2009; UST Report, 10/20/2008).  
For institutions that participated in generally available capital programs, SEO total yearly 
compensation was limited to $500,000, though this limit could be waived with “full public 
disclosure and [a] shareholder vote”.  Golden parachute payments for the top five highest -
paid employees of these institutions were restricted to one year’s compen sation, instead of 
three (UST PR, 02/04/2009).  
For institutions participating in any of these capital programs, clawback provisions—which 
enabled the QFI to retake bonuses and incentive payments of SEOs that had earned them by 
knowingly engaging in decept ive practices—were expanded from the top five SEOs to the 
next 20 highest-paid employees. The new guidance also required participating institutions 
to more aggressively police any luxury expenditures and require d the CEO’s sign-off on any 
expenditures that “could be viewed as excessive or luxury items” (UST PR , 02/04/2009). 
These guidelines, however, did not apply retroactively (UST Report, 06/10/2009). 
Treasury published its last Interim Final Rule on June 10, 2009. The final rule implemented 
and modified much of the expanded restrictions outlined in ARRA and the February 2009, 
guidance. Treasury further limited bonuses and incentive compensation paid to SEOs, as well 
as some of the most highly compensated employees, to one third of total compensation, with 
933
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 46 ---
the number of employees affected by this limit increasing based on the amount of aid given.25 
The $500,000 limit specified in the February guidance was amended to “link compensation 
to long-term firm value” by allowing additional compensation over $500,000, provided that 
it was in the form of long -form, restricted stock. The stock -based compensation was still 
limited to one  third of total compensation. Additionally, g olden parachute payment 
restrictions were broadened to include any payments that were made as a result of a change 
in control of the company. Institutions were required to exercise their clawback provisions 
if payments subject to them were found to be based on inaccurate criteria or data, whereas 
they were merely given the option to do so in the February guidance (UST PR, 06/10/2009). 
The guidance also mandated that TARP recipients hold an annual shareholder vote to 
approve executive compensation packages. 
The most notable change in the final rule was the creation of a Special Master for TARP 
Executive Compensation.26 The Special Master was responsible for reviewing compensation 
plans at firms receiving “exceptional” assistance to make sure they did so in a way that 
“maximize(s) long -term shareholder value and pro tect(s) taxpayer interests”. 27 This 
authority went far beyond the threshold in the earlier guidance. The Special Master was able 
to review and approve (or disapprove) the compensation structures of SEOs and the next 
100 most highly paid employees, as well as executive officers that were not among the most 
highly paid employees and thus , not subject to the typical bonus and incentive payment 
restrictions (UST PR, 06/10/2009). Total annual compensation that was less than or equal 
to $500,000, not including lo ng-term restricted stock, would automatically be approved by 
the Special Master.28 Some of these responsibilities were originally given to the Secretary of 
the Treasury as part of the ARRA (P.L. 111-5). 
While the February guidelines did not apply retroactively, the Special Master had the power 
to evaluate payments, bonuses, or compensat ion made by any TARP recipient before 
February 17, 2009 , “to determine whether any such payments were inconsistent with the 
purposes of Section 111 of EESA” (UST Report, 06/10/2009). If the Special Master found any 
issues, firms could negotiate reimbursements to the US government. 
 
25 Institutions that received over $500 million in assistance had their top five highest -paid executives, as well 
as the 20 next highest-paid affected by the one-third of total compensation limit. 
26 A number of the provisions laid out in the June 10 Interim Fin al Rule, such as the one -thirds limit on total 
compensation, as well as the number of SEOs and employees affected by executive compensation restrictions 
based on total TARP aid received, were originally passed via Section 111 of the ARRA.  
27 In addition to  approving compensation agreements, the Special Master was also responsible for reviewing 
compensation that was paid prior to the passage of ARRA, as well as negotiating reimbursements for these 
where relevant (UST PR, 06/10/2009).  
28 Equity-based compensation was included in this limit by using the fair market value on the day of 
compensation. Equity-based compensation for prior years would not be included ( UST Report, 06/10/2009 - 
p. 29). 
934
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 47 ---
13. Exit strategy: Treasury did not develop an explicit strategy for exiting its CAP 
investments, although the capital instruments contained built-in exit features. 
While no investments were made under the CAP, the design of the Conve rtible Preferred 
gave the government an indirect exit strategy if the backstop was used. Conversion would 
occur automatically after seven years. Before that, the QFI could convert the preferred shares 
to common equity to boost market confidence or to meet supervisory requirements ( CAP: 
Term Sheet; CAP: White Paper).  
As explained, Treasury was required to sell at least 20 percent of its total original amount of 
common stock in a given QFI every year once the conversion had taken place, which put a 
cap on the amount of time the government could remain as an investor (CAP: Term Sheet). 
The dividend rates, at 9 percent, and other conditions also incentivized banks to replace any 
Convertible Preferred with private capital (Glasserman and Wang 2009).  
III. Evaluation 
Post-crisis analysis of SCAP and CAP has considered: (1) the transparency of the program; 
(2) whether the programs succeeded at increasing banks’ capital through private sources, 
returning the government’s investment, and promoting lending in the economy; and (3) the 
empirical quality of the stress tests. Much of the analysis focused on SCAP, rather than CAP.  
Transparency. SCAP was transparent in both its design and results, aiming to lend credibility 
to the stress test and allow markets to make  direct comparisons across banks. Such a high 
level of transparency was  considered necessary to eliminate investor concerns. (Geithner, 
Metrick, and Ross, Working Paper)  
However, the unusual amount of transparency  attracted criticism falling largely into three 
groups: (i) Federal Reserve’s release of bank-specific test results broke from the standard 
level of confidentiality involved in bank supervision; (ii) the upfront commitment to publicly 
disclose the results may encourage supervisors to white-wash the results to protect weak 
banks; and (iii) full disclosure of banks’ capital positions would reveal firms as materially 
weaker than expected. Geithner, Metrick, and Ross find the third criticism most well-founded 
in their recent working paper , noting former Fed chairman Bernanke’s statement , in his 
2015 memoir, that disclosing banks’ weakness could “possibly [lead] to new runs and further 
sharp declines in bank stock prices” (Bernanke 2015). 
Regardless, Geithner, Metrick , and Ross acknowledge t ransparency in combination with 
other features of SCAP made it easier for the banks to raise private capital  to meet SCAP 
requirements and replace already injected public capital.  
Success in meeting goals. The programs succeeded at getting banks to raise capital through 
private sources, rather than drawing on the CAP backstop. In the year after the results were 
released, the SCAP firms were able to add over $200 billion in common equity . They also 
935
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 48 ---
repaid $124.3 billion in CPP capital  and $40 billion in TIP  capital (Bernanke, 05/06/2010 ; 
CPP Transaction Data; UST PR, 12/09/2009; UST PR, 12/23/2009).  
Officials who worked on the program said the lack of usage of CAP was “a strong indication 
of its success, as our objective in the first place was to recapitali ze the system with private 
capital” (Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs 2020). In a valuation analysis of the Convertible 
Preferred, Glasserman and Wang (2009) found that the terms were attractive to banks, yet 
none participated. The lack of participation, they sta ted, could have been due to more 
stringent rules on executive compensation and corporate governance, as well as signaling 
aspects that could negatively impact banks’ ability to raise private capital (Glasserman and 
Wang 2009).  
Bernanke, then the Fed chair man, did say that the designers of the program had hoped to 
“hasten the return to a better lending environment ,” which had not happened in the year 
since the results had been released (Bernanke, 05/06/2010).  
Evaluation of stress test methodology. A COP report released in June 2009 included an 
evaluation of the stress testing methods, written by Professors Eric Talley and Johan Walden, 
as an appendix. The analysis found that, based on the short time frame, as well as the extent 
of the stress in the banking system, the Federal Reserve’s risk modelling approach was 
“reasonable and conservative ,” and that they did a commendable job. In particular, the 
authors praised the high levels of losses imposed in the more adverse scenario, as well as the 
large amount of capital required of those that needed it. They praised the use of survey and 
market-based estimates over historical data, use of a two-year time frame, the incorporation 
of heterogeneity across BHCs, and the u sage of the 6 -4 rule as “a defensible first 
approximation” (COP, 06/09/2009).  
Talley and Walden’s report, however, also included some criticism. The tailoring of loss rates 
based on heterogeneous elements amongst the various BHCs, while important, require d 
“significant interaction” between regulators and BHCs, which could undermine the 
objectivity of the tests. The tailoring elements amplified the replicability problem explained 
above. Finally, the usage of the holding company itself as the primary unit of  analysis was a 
subject of debate. The authors felt that, even if a BHC was adequately capitalized on an 
aggregate level, the stress tests did not answer the question of how the resources should be 
distributed to address risk across its subsidiaries (COP, 06/09/2009). 
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report in September 2010 detailing 
some of the lessons that could be learned from the SCAP. The multidisciplinary, interagency 
approach to the SCAP was a key component of the process, and a llowed for “productive 
debate” with regards to some of the nuances of the tests, exemplified by the tailor ed 
accounting process done for each BHC (GAO 10-861).  
GAO recommended generally for the Fed and other regulators to increase transparency 
during the traditional supervisory process, issue more specific guidance for bank examiners 
and assessors, fully develop and disseminate among regulators the aforementioned 
936
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 49 ---
surveillance plan to enhance bank supervision, and further increase coordination and 
communication amongst regulatory entities (GAO 10-861).  
IV. References 
American International Group, Inc. September 30, 2010. American International Group – 
Financial Supplement: Third Quarter 2010. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/american-
international-group-financial-supplement-third-quarter-2010. 
Bernanke, Ben S. May 11, 2009. “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program.” Fe deral 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ben-s-bernanke-supervisory-
capital-assessment-program.  
———. May 6, 2010. “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program – One Year Later.” 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ben-s-bernanke-
supervisory-capital-assessment-program-one-year-later.  
———. 2015. The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and Its Aftermath .  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/courage-act-memoir-crisis-and-its-aftermath.  
Capital Purchase Program Questions. March 1, 2012. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-purchase-program-questions. 
Capital Purchase Program Term Sheet for Mutual Banks.  April 14, 2009. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-releases-capital-purchase-program-term-
sheet-mutual-banks.  
Citigroup, Inc. February 27, 2009. “Citi to Exchange Preferred Securities for Common, 
Increasing Tangible Common Equity to as Much as $81 Billion.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/citi-exchange-preferred-securities-common-increasing-
tangible-common-equity-much-81-billion. 
———. July 26, 2009.  “Citi Announces Preliminary Results of Public Share Exchange.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/citi-announces-preliminary-results-public-share-
exchange.  
Clark, Tim, Matthew Kabaker, and Lee Sachs. 2020. “Bank Capital: Reviving the System.” In 
First Responders: Inside the U.S. Strategy for Fighting the 2007 –2009 Global Financial Crisis , 
edited by Ben S. Bernanke, Timothy F. Geithner, and Henry M. Paulson, Jr., with J. Nellie Liang, 
49–81. New Haven: Yale University Press.  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/first-
responders-inside-us-strategy-fighting-2007-2009-global-financial-crisis. 
Congressional Ove rsight Panel  (COP). n.d. About the Congressional Oversight Panel. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/about-congressional-oversight-panel. 
937
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 50 ---
———. December 10, 2008.  “Questions About the $700 Billion Emergency Economic 
Stabilization Funds.”  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/questions-about-700-billion-
emergency-economic-stabilization-funds.  
———. June 9, 2009. Appendix A.  “Stress Testing and Shoring Up Bank Capital.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/cop-june-oversight-report-stress-testing-and-shoring-
bank-capital.   
———. March 16, 2011. “Final Report of the Congressional Panel.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/congressional-oversight-panel-march-oversight-report-
final-report-congressional-oversight. 
———. n.d. Congressional Oversight Panel Reports. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/congressional-oversight-panel-reports.  
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. July 21, 2010. Basic FDIC Insurance Coverage 
Permanently Increased to $250,000 Per Depositor. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/basic-
fdic-insurance-coverage-permanently-increased-250000-depositor. 
Federal Register. Vol. 77, No. 195. October 9, 2012. “Final Rule: Annual Stress Test.” Office of 
the Comptroller of the Currency, United States Department of the Treasury. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-register-vol-77-no-195-final-rule-annual-stress-
test. 
———. Vol. 77, No. 198. October 12, 2012. “Final Rule on Stress Test.” Federal Reserve Board 
of Governors. p. 62378-409. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-register-vol-77-no-198-final-rule-stress-test. 
Federal Reserve Board of Governors (FRB). April 24, 2009. “Board publishes white paper on 
process and methodologies employed by federal banking supervisory agencies in  capital 
assessment of large US bank holding companies.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/board-
publishes-white-paper-process-and-methodologies-employed-federal-banking-
supervisory. 
———. April 24, 2009. “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program  (SCAP): Design and 
Implementation.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2445. 
———. May 6, 2009. “Joint statement by Federal Reserve, Treasury, FDIC, and OCC on 
Treasury Capital Assistance Program and Supervisory Capital Assessment Program.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/joint-statement-federal-reserve-treasury-fdic-and-occ-
treasury-capital-assistance-program. 
———. May 7, 2009. “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP): Overview of 
Results.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2446.  
———. November 9, 2009. “Federal Reserve Board makes announcement regarding the 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP).” 
938
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 51 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-reserve-board-makes-announcement-regarding-
supervisory-capital-assessment-program. 
———. November 20, 2019. Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses (ALLL). 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/allowance-loan-and-lease-losses-alll. 
———. February 6, 2020. Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/dodd-frank-act-stress-tests. 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY). June 2011. 101: Term Asset-Backed Securities 
Loan Facility (TALF). https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/new-york-fed-101-term-asset-
backed-securities-loan-facility-talf. 
Financial Stability Oversight Board  (FSOB). March 31, 2009. “Quarterly Report to Congress 
pursuant to section 104(g) of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008: March 31, 
2009.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-pursuant-section-
104g-emergency-economic-stabilization-act-2008. 
———. June 30, 2009.  Quarterly Report to Congress pursuant to section 104(g) of the 
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008: June 30, 2009 .  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-pursuant-section-104g-
emergency-economic-stabilization-act-2008-0. 
Furman, Jason. 2020.  “The Fiscal Response to the Great Recession,” in Ben S. Bernanke, 
Timothy F. Geithner, Henry M. Paulson, Jr. , with J. Nellie Liang, eds.  First Responders: Inside 
the US Strategy for Fighting the 2007 – 2009 Global Financial Crisis.  Yale University Press. 
2020.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/first-responders-inside-us-strategy-fighting-2007-2009-
global-financial-crisis.  
Glasserman ,Paul and Zhenyu Wang. December 2009. “Valuing the Treasury’s Capital 
Assistance Program. ” Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/valuing-treasurys-capital-assistance-program.  
Geither, Timothy F. Geithner, Andrew Metrick, Chase P. Ross. July 2020. “Capital in the 
Financial Crisis.” Working Paper.  
Jester, Dan, David Nason, and Jeremiah Norton . 2020. “Recapitalizing the Banking System,” 
in Ben S. Bernanke, Timothy F. Geithner, Henry M. Paulson, Jr. , with J. Nellie Liang, eds. First 
Responders: Inside the US Strategy for Fighting the 2007 – 2009 Global Financial Crisis.  Yale 
University Press. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/first-responders-inside-us-strategy-
fighting-2007-2009-global-financial-crisis. 
Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program  (SIGTARP). 
October 5, 2009. “Emergency Capital Injections Provided to Support the Viability of Bank of 
America, Other Major Banks, and the US Financial System.” 
939
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 52 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/emergency-capital-injections-provided-support-
viability-bank-america-other-major-banks-and. 
———. April 20, 2010. SIGTARP: Quarterly Report to Congress – Q1 2010. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-q1-2010. 
———. July 30, 2014. SIGTARP: Quarterly Report to Congress – Q3 2014. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-q3-2014. 
———. 2018. “SIGTARP: Congressional Justification for Appropriations and Annual 
Performance Report and Plan – FY 2018.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp -
congressional-justification-appropriations-and-annual-performance-report-and-plan. 
———. n.d. SIGTARP – About us. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-about-us. 
P.L. 110-343. Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008. 110 th Congress of the United 
States. 3 October 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-110-343-emergency-economic-stabilization-
act-2008. 
P.L. 111-5. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. 111 th Congress of the United 
States. 17 February 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-111-5-american-recovery-and-
reinvestment-act-2009. 
P.L. 111-203. Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. 111 th Congress 
of the United States. 21 July 2010. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2521. 
U.S. Department of the Treasury.  October 14, 2008. “Treasury Announces TARP Capital 
Purchase Program Descrip tion.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury -announces-
tarp-capital-purchase-program-description.  
———. October 20, 2008. “TARP Capital Purchase Program.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tarp-capital-purchase-program-interim-final-rule-
executive-compensation.  
———. December 30, 2008. “Responses to Questions of the first report of the Congressional 
Oversight Panel for Economic Stabilization.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/responses -
questions-first-report-congressional-oversight-panel-economic-stabilization. 
———. February 4, 2009.  “Treasury Announces New Restrictions on Executive 
Compensation.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury -announces-new-restrictions-
executive-compensation.  
———. February 10, 2009. “Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner Outl ines Comprehensive 
Financial Stability Plan.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury -secretary-tim-
geithner-outlines-comprehensive-financial-stability-plan. 
940
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 53 ---
———. February  25, 2009. “Capital Assistance Program FAQs.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-assistance-program-faqs.  
———. February 25, 2009. “Capital Assistance Program: Summary of Mandatorily 
Convertible Preferred Stock Terms.”  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-assistance-
program-summary-mandatorily-convertible-preferred-stock-terms. 
———. February 25, 2009. “The Capital Assistance Program and its role in the Financial 
Stability Plan.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/cap ital-assistance-program-and-its-role-
financial-stability-plan. 
 ———. February 25, 2009. “US Treasury Releases Terms of Capital Assistance Program.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-treasury-releases-terms-capital-assistance-program-
0.  
———. June 10, 2009. “Interim Final Rule on TARP Standards for Compensation and 
Corporate Governance.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interim -final-rule-tarp-
standards-compensation-and-corporate-governance.  
———. June 10, 2009. “TARP Standards for Compensation and Corpo rate Governance.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interim-final-rule-tarp-standards-compensation-and-
corporate-governance. 
———. December 9, 2009. “Treasury Receives $45 Billion Payment from Bank of America.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-receives-45-billion-payment-bank-america.  
———. December 23, 2009. “Treasury Receives $45 Billion in Repayments from Wells Fargo 
and Citigroup.”  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-receives-45-billion-
repayments-wells-fargo-and-citigroup. 
———. October 2010. Troubled Asset Relief Program: Two Year Retrospective. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/troubled-asset-relief-program-two-year-retrospective-
united-states-department-treasury.  
———. July 13, 2012. TARP: Executive Compensation Rules and Guidance. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tarp-executive-compensation-rules-and-guidance. 
———. December  9, 2013. Targeted Investment Program  (TIP): Pro gram Purpose and 
Overview. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/targeted -investment-program-program-
purpose-and-overview.  
———. February 19, 2015. TARP Investment Program Transaction Reports  (CPP 
Transaction Data). https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tarp -investment-program-
transaction-reports. 
941
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 54 ---
———. July 2, 2015. TARP Tracker from November 2008 to January 2020. 
https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/reports/Pages/TARP-
Tracker.aspx#All.  
———. November 15, 2016. TARP Programs. https://ypfs.som.ya le.edu/library/tarp-
programs. 
———. November 1, 2019. Monthly TARP Update for 11/01/2019. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/monthly-tarp-update-11012019. 
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). September 29, 2010. (GAO 10-861) “Troubled 
Asset Relief Program: Bank Stress Test Offers Lessons as Regulators Take Further Actions to 
Strengthen Supervisory Oversight.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tarp -bank-stress-
test-offers-lessons-regulators-take-further-actions-strengthen-supervisory.  
V. Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
(CAP: FAQ) “Capital Assistance Program FAQs.” United States Department of the Treasury. 
February 25, 2009.  
Frequently asked questions about the Capital Assistance Program released by the Treasury.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-assistance-program-faqs.  
(CAP: Term Sheet) Capital Assistance Program: Summary of Mandatorily Convertible 
Preferred Stock Terms. United States Department of the Treasury. February 25, 2009. 
Overview of the terms f or the convertible preferred stock that would be issued to the 
government as part of the Capital Assistance Program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-assistance-program-summary-mandatorily-
convertible-preferred-stock-terms.  
(CAP: White Paper) “ The Capital Assistance Program and its role in the Financial Stability 
Plan.” United States Department of the Treasury. February 25, 2009.  
Paper released by the US Treasury on the function of Capital Assistance Program as a vehicle 
to ensure that the larges t financial institutions will be able to continue lending.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-assistance-program-and-its-role-financial-
stability-plan.    
(Geithner, Bernanke, Paulson 2020) Ben S. Bernanke, Timothy F. Geithner, Henry M. Paulson, 
Jr., with J. Nellie Liang, eds. First Responders: Inside the US Strategy for Fighting the 2007 – 
2009 Global Financial Crisis . Yale University Press. 2020.  An insider’s view of the U.S. 
government’s response to the 2007–2009 global financial crisis, as recounted by the people who 
made   the  key  decisions.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/first-responders-inside-us-strategy-fighting-2007-2009-
global-financial-crisis.  
942
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 55 ---
(SCAP: Design and Implementation) “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program: Design 
and Implementation.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors. April 24, 2009. Document by the 
Federal Reserve describing the key design aspects of the Supervisory Capital Assessment 
Program. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2445.  
(SCAP: Overview of Results) “The Sup ervisory Capital assessment Program: Overview of 
Results.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors. May 7, 2009. 
 Results from the Federal Reserve’s Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, the stress test 
conducted in the spring of 2009 on 19 of the largest ban k-holding companies and financial 
institutions in the US.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2446.  
(UST PR, 02/10/2009) “Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner Outlines Comprehensive Financial 
Stability Plan.” United States Department of the Treasury. February 10, 2009.  
Speech by Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner on the next steps to recovering from the ongoing 
financial crisis. Includes the first mention of what would later be known as the SCAP and CAP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-secretary-tim-geithner-outlines-
comprehensive-financial-stability-plan.  
(UST PR, 02/25/2009) “US Treasury Releases Terms of Capital Assistance Program.” United 
States Department of the Treasury. February 25, 2009. 
 Press release by the Treasury of the terms for the Capital Assistance Program, an unlimited 
government capital backstop .  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-treasury-releases-terms-capital-assistance-program-
0.  
Implementation Documents 
(CAP: FAQ) “Capital Assistance Program FAQs.” United States Dep artment of the Treasury. 
February 25, 2009.  
Frequently asked questions about the Capital Assistance Program released by  the  United 
 States   Department  of  Treasury.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-assistance-program-faqs.  
(CAP: Term Sheet) Capital Assistance Program: Summary of Mandatorily Convertible 
Preferred Stock Terms. United States Department of the Treasury. February 25, 2009. 
Overview of the terms for the convertible preferred stock that would be issued to the 
government as part of the Capital Assistance Program. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-assistance-program-summary-mandatorily-
convertible-preferred-stock-terms.  
(CAP: White Paper) “The Capital Assistance Program and its role in the Financial Stability  
Plan.” United States Department of the Treasury. February 25, 2009.  
Paper released by the United States Treasury on the function of Capital Assistance Program as 
a vehicle to ensure that the largest financial institutions will be able to continue lending . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/capital-assistance-program-and-its-role-financial-
stability-plan.  
943
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 56 ---
(SCAP: Design and Implementation) “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program: Design 
and Implementation.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors. April 24, 2009.   
Document by the Federal Reserve describing the key design aspects of the Supervisory Capital 
Assessment Program . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2445 
(TARP Executive Compensation Rules and Guidance) TARP: Executive Compensation Rules 
and Guidance. United States Department of the Treasury. July 13, 2012. 
Overview page of TARP’s executive compensation restrictions with key facts about the program. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tarp-executive-compensation-rules-and-guidance.  
(UST Interim Final Rul e – 06/10/2009) “Interim Final Rule on TARP Standards for 
Compensation and Corporate Governance.” United States Department of the Treasury. June 
10, 2009.   
Final rule released by United States Treasury to implement the executive compensation 
standards that were amended by ARRA.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interim-final-rule-tarp-standards-compensation-and-
corporate-governance.  
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 195, 10/09/2012) “Final Rule: Annual Stress Test.” Office of 
the Comptroller of the Currency, United States Department of the Treasury. October 9, 2012. 
Final rule on the implementation of the annual stress tests for large b anks and bank holding 
companies. 
 https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2012-10-09/pdf/2012-24608.pdf#page=9.  
(Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 10/12/2012a) “Final Rule: Annual Company -Run Stress 
Test Requirements for Banking Organizations With Total Consolidated Assets Over $10 
Billion Other Than Covered Companies.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors. October 12, 
2012. 
Detailed stress test requirements for banking organizations with consolidated assets between  
$10  and $50  billion. 
 https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2012-10-12/pdf/2012-24988.pdf.  
(Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 10/12/2012b) “Final  Rule: Supervisory and Company -
Run Stress Test Requirements for Covered Companies.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors. 
October 12, 2012 . 
Detailed stress test requirements for banking organizations with consolidated assets of over 
$50 billion (“covered companies”).  
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2012-10-12/pdf/2012-24987.pdf.  
(P.L. 110-343) Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008. 110 th Congress of the United 
States. October 3, 2008.   
The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, which established the  Troubled  Assets 
 Relief  Program  (TARP). 
https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ343/PLAW-110publ343.pdf.  
944
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 57 ---
(P.L. 111-203) Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. 111th Congress 
of the United States. July 21 2010 . 
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which established the 
FSOC and OFR, enhanced the supervision of certain non -bank financial companies, and 
generally tightened up the US financial regulatory framework post-GFC.   
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-111publ203/pdf/PLAW-111publ203.pdf.  
(P.L. 111-5) American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. 111th Congress of the United 
States. February 17, 2009. 
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, which made appropriations fo r job 
preservation and creation, infrastructure investment,  energy  efficiency  and  science,  
assistance  to  the  unemployed,  and  State  and  local  fiscal  stabilization.  
https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ5/PLAW-111publ5.pdf.  
Press Releases/Announcements 
(AIG Financial Supplement Q3 2010) American International Group – Financial Supplement: 
Third Quarter 2010 . 
Financial Supplement for AIG’s third quarter of 2010, which provides financial information 
about the insurer as well as information on the government’s TARP investments in the firm. 
American International Group, Inc. 30 September 2010.  
https://www.aig.com/content/dam/aig/america-canada/us/documents/investor-
relations/3q10-fin-suppl-report.pdf.  
(Citi PR, 02/27/2009) “Citi to E xchange Preferred Securities for Common, Increasing 
Tangible Common Equity to as Much as $81 Billion.” Citigroup, Inc. February 27, 2009. 
Press release from Citi detailing the bank’s exchange of existing preferred stock for common 
stock to increase its tan gible common equity and restore confidence to its investors.  
https://www.citigroup.com/citi/news/2009/090227a.htm.  
(Citi PR, 07/26/2009) “Citi Announces Preliminary Results of Public Share Exchange.” 
Citigroup, Inc. July 26, 2009. 
Press release from Citi announcing that it, in partnership with the US government, had 
managed to raise about $58 billion in new common stock via the exchange of  existing 
 preferred  stock  investments. https://www.citigroup.com/citi/news/2009/090726a.htm.  
(FRB PR, 04/24/2009) “Board publishes white paper on process and methodologies 
employed by federal banking supervisory agencies in capital assessment of large US bank 
holding companies.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors . 
Press release from the Federal Reserve announcing the release of its design and implementation 
principles of the SCAP. April 24,  2009. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20090424a.htm.  
(FRB PR, 11/09/2009) “Federal Reserve Board makes announcement regarding the 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP).” Federal Reserve Board of Governors. 
November 9, 2009. 
Press release from the Federal Reserve stating that the 19 SCAP institutions had collectively 
945
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 58 ---
raised nearly $75 billion in new capital to make up for the shortfalls identified in  the  stress  
test. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20091109a.htm.  
(FRB PR, 11/15/2012) “Federal Reserve Board releases econ omic and financial market 
scenarios that will be used in next round of stress tests for large financial institutions.” 
Federal Reserve Board of Governors. November 15, 2012. 
Press release from the Federal Reserve outlining the scenarios to be used for the 2013 Dodd-
Frank stress tests.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20121115a.htm.  
(FRB PR, 12/12/2007) “Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks.” Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors. December 12, 2007.  
Announcement of the Term Auction Facility (TAF) by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  late  2007. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/20071212a.htm.  
(UST PR, 02/04/2009) “Treasury Announces New Restrictions on Executive Compensation.” 
United States Department of the Treasur y. February 4, 2009. 
Treasury press release summarizing the new guidelines on executive compensation for all TARP 
recipients going forward . 
http://web.archive.org/web/20090207073132/http:/treasury.gov/press/releases/tg15.h
tm.  
(UST PR, 02/10/2009) “Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner Outlines Comprehensive Financial 
Stability Plan.” United States Department of the Treasury. February 10, 2009. 
Speech by Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner on the next steps to recovering from the ongoing 
financial crisis. Includes the first mention of what would later be known as the SCAP and CAP. 
https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-
releases/Pages/200921022303013043.aspx.  
(UST PR, 02/25/2009) “US Treasury Releases Terms of Capital Assistance Program.” United 
States Department of the Treasury. February  25, 2009. 
Press release by the Treasury of the terms for the Capital Assistance Program, an unlimited 
government capital backstop.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-treasury-releases-terms-capital-assistance-program-
0.  
(UST PR, 06/10/2009) “Interim Final Rule on TARP Standards for Compensation and 
Corporate Governance.” United States Department of the Treasury. June 10, 2009. 
Final rule released by Treasury to implement the executive compensation standards that were 
amended by  ARRA.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interim-final-rule-tarp-standards-compensation-and-
corporate-governance.  
(UST PR, 10/14/2008) “Treasury Announces TARP Capital Purchase Program Description.” 
United States Department of the Treasury. October 14, 2008. 
Treasury press release that briefly highlights key points – such as the eligibility, dividend rates, 
946
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 59 ---
and more - about the Capital Purchase  Program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-announces-tarp-capital-purchase-program-
description.  
(UST PR, 12/09/2009) “Treasury Receives $45 Billion Payment from Bank of America.” 
United States Department of the Treasury. December 9, 2009. 
Treasury announcement that Bank of  America had repaid all of its $45 billion in TARP funds, 
bringing the total amount repaid  to  $118  billion. 
 https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-receives-45-billion-payment-bank-america.  
(UST PR, 12/23/2009) “Treasury Receives $45 Billion in Repayments from Wells Fargo and 
Citigroup.” United States Department of the Treasury. 23 December 2009.  
Treasury announcement that Citigroup and Wells Fargo had repaid all of their $45 billion in 
TARP funds, bringing  the  total  amount  repaid  to  $164  billion.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-receives-45-billion-repayments-wells-fargo-
and-citigroup.  
Media Stories 
(Bernanke, 05/11/2009) Bernanke, Ben S. “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program.” 
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. May 11, 2009.  
Speech given by Ben Bernanke on the design and  results  of  the  SCAP  shortly  after  it  had 
 concluded.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ben-s-bernanke-supervisory-capital-assessment-
program. 
(Bernanke, 05/06/2010) Bernanke, Ben S. “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program – 
One Year Later.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. May 6, 2010 . 
One-year retrospective speech on the design and effects of the Supervisory Capital Assessment 
Program, given by Ben Bernanke.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ben-s-bernanke-supervisory-capital-assessment-
program-one-year-later.  
Key Academic Papers 
(Glasserman and Wang 2011) Paul Glasserman and Zhenyu Wang. “Valuing the Treasury’s 
Capital Assistance Program. Federal Reserve Bank of New York. December 2009.  
Paper that develops a contingent claims framework in which to estimate market values of the 
Capital Assistance  Program  securities.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/valuing-treasurys-capital-assistance-program.  
(Hirtle, Schuermann and Stiroh (2009)) Be verly H irtle, Til Schuermann, Kevin Stiroh. 
“Macroprudential Supervision of Financial Institutions: Lessons from the SCAP.” Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York. November 2009 . 
Paper that reviews the key features of the SCAP and discusses how they can be leve raged to 
improve bank supervision in the future.  
947
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 60 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/macroprudential-supervision-financial-institutions-
lessons-scap.  
(Peristian, Morgan and Savino  2010) Stavros Peristian, Donald P. Morgan, Vanessa Savino. 
“The Information Value of the Stress Test and Bank Opacity.” Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York. July 2010 . 
Paper that investigates whether the “stress test,” the extraordinary examination of the nineteen 
largest U.S. bank holding companies conducted by federal bank supervi sors in 2009, produced 
information demanded by the market.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/information-value-stress-test-and-bank-opacity.  
(Thatcher 2009) Thatcher, Laura G. “Executive Compensation Restrictions Under the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009.” Compensation and Benefits Review 41 No. 
3, March 26, 2009.  
Breakdown of the key differences between the initial executive co mpensation requirements in 
EESA and TARP versus those from ARRA and Treasury in February  2009. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/executive-compensation-restrictions-under-american-
recovery-and-reinvestment-act-2009.  
(Webel 2013) Webel, Baird. “Troubled A sset Relief Program (TARP): Implementation and 
Status.” Congressional Research Service. June 27, 2013 . 
CRS Report that chronicles the life of TARP and the US government’s rescue of the financial 
system and discusses post-crisis regulatory  reform.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/troubled-asset-relief-program-tarp-implementation-
and-status.  
Reports/Assessments 
(COP December 2008) “Questions About the $700 Billion Emergency Economic Stabilization 
Funds.” Congressional Oversight Panel. December 10, 2008.  
The First Report of the Congressional Oversight Panel with ten questions from COP members to 
Treasury on the status and  implementation  of  TARP. 
 https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/questions-about-700-billion-emergency-economic-
stabilization-funds.  
(COP March 2011) “Final Report of the Congressional Panel.” Congressional Oversight Panel. 
March 16, 2011 . 
The Final Report of the Congressional Oversight Panel, summarizing all the government’s 
programs – from bank investment to credit market support t o housing . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/congressional-oversight-panel-march-oversight-report-
final-report-congressional-oversight.  
(COP, 06/09/2009, Appendix A) “Stress Testing and Shoring Up Bank Capital.” Congressional 
Oversight Panel. June 9, 2009 . 
June Oversight report from the COP on evaluating the results of the Federal Reserve stress 
tests that were conducted in May of 2009  . 
948
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 61 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/cop-june-oversight-report-stress-testing-and-shoring-
bank-capital.  
(FSOB Report, 03/31/2009) “Quarterly Report to Congress pursuant to section 104(g) of the 
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008: March 31, 2009.” Financial Stability 
Oversight Board. March 31, 200 9. 
Quarterly report (Q1 2009) from the Financial Stability Oversight Board (FSOB) that assesses 
the preliminary effects of EESA programs . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-pursuant-section-104g-
emergency-economic-stabilization-act-2008.  
(FSOB Report, 06/30/2009) Quarterly Report to Congress pursuant to section 104(g) of the 
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008: June 30, 2009. Financial Stability Oversight 
Board. June 30, 2009. Quarterly report (Q2 2009) from the Financial Stability Oversight Board 
(FSOB) that assesses the preliminary effects of EESA programs.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-pursuant-section-104g-
emergency-economic-stabilization-act-2008-0.  
(GAO 10-861) “Troubled Asset Relief Program: Bank Stress Test Offers Lessons as Regulators 
Take Further Actions to Strengthen Supervisory Oversight.” United States Government 
Accountability Office. September 29, 2010.   
GAO Report that analyzes the effects of the SCAP and provides lessons learned for future 
supervisory exercises.  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tarp-bank-stress-test-offers-
lessons-regulators-take-further-actions-strengthen-supervisory.  
(SCAP: Design and Implementation) “The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program: Design 
and Implementation.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors. April  24, 2009. 
Document by the Federal Reserve describing the key design aspects of the Supervisory Capital 
Assessment Program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2445.  
(SCAP: Overview of Results) “The Supervisory Capital assessment Program: Overview of 
Results.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors. May  7, 2009. 
Document by the Federal Reserve describing the key design aspects of the Supervisory Capital 
Assessment Program. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2446.  
(SIGTARP 10/5/2009) “Emergency Capital Injections Prov ided to Support the Viability of 
Bank of America, Other Major Banks, and the US Financial System.” Office of the Special 
Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program. October 5, 2009. SIGTARP Report 
that examines the basis for the selection of B ank of America and eight other financial 
institutions  for  TARP  funds  in  October  of  2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/emergency-capital-injections-provided-support-
viability-bank-america-other-major-banks-and.  
(SIGTARP Annual Report – FY 2018) “SIGTARP: Congressional Justification for 
Appropriations and Annual Performance Report and Plan  – FY 2018.” Office of the Special 
Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program. 2018.  
949
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 62 ---
SIGTARP Annual Report for FY 2018, as well as new requests for Congressional Appropriations 
for FY 2018. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-congressional-justification-appropriations-and-
annual-performance-report-and-plan.  
(SIGTARP April 2010 – Table of Contents) SIGTARP: Quarterly Report to Congress – Q1 2010. 
Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program. April 20, 2010. 
SIGTARP Quarterly Report to Congress for Q1 2010, which provides summaries and evaluations 
of  all  existing  TARP  programs. 
 https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-q1-2010.  
(SIGTARP July 2014) SIGTARP: Quarterly Report to Congress – Q3 2014. Office of the Special 
Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program. July 30, 2014. 
SIGTARP Quarterly Report to Congress for Q3 2014, which provides summaries and evaluations 
of all existing TARP programs . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-q3-2014.  
(TARP: Monthly Update) Monthly TARP Update for 11/01/2019 . United States Department 
of the Treasury. November 1, 2019. TARP Update for November 2019, detailing a line -by-
line breakdown amounts disbursed and recovered for each of the government’s TARP 
programs. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/monthly-tarp-update-11012019.  
(TARP Two-Year Retrospective) Troubled Asset Relief Program: Two Year Retrospective. 
United States Department of t he Treasury. October 2010.  
Treasury report on the development, execution, and outcomes of key TARP programs since their 
inception – including the CPP, HAMP, and others, as well as revised projections about the total 
costs of the programs. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/troubled-asset-relief-program-two-year-retrospective-
united-states-department-treasury.  
(UST Report December 2008) “Responses to Questions of the first report of the 
Congressional Oversight Panel for Economic Stabilization.” United States Department of the 
Treasury. December 30, 2008.  
Responses from the Department of the Treasury to the 10 questions asked by the Congressional 
Oversight Panel in its first report to Congress.  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/responses-
questions-first-report-congressional-oversight-panel-economic-stabilization.  
(UST Report, 06/10/2009) “TARP Standards for Compensation and Corporate Governance.” 
United States Department of the Treasury. June 10, 2009 
 Final rule released by Treasury to implement the executive compensation standards that were 
amended by ARRA.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interim-final-rule-tarp-standards-compensation-and-
corporate-governance.  
(UST Report, 10/20/2008) “TARP Capital Purchase Program.” United states Department of 
the Treasury. October 20, 2008.  
Initial final rule by the US Treasury a shortly after the creation of TARP on executive 
950
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 63 ---
compensation restrictions for all TARP recipients. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tarp-
capital-purchase-program-interim-final-rule-executive-compensation.  
 
  
951
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 64 ---
VI. Appendixes 
Appendix A: Timeline of Key Events 
September 15, 2008:  Lehman Brothers files for bankruptcy. Bank of America 
purchases Merrill Lynch for $50 billion.  
September 21, 2008:  The Federal Reserve Board approves the applications of 
investment banks Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley to become 
bank holding companies,  allowing them to access Federal 
Reserve liquidity facilities. 
September 29, 2008:  The first vote on the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act 
(EESA) fails in the House of Representatives, with a vote of 205 -
228. 
October 3, 2008:  EESA is signed into law . Work on the Troubled Asset s Relief 
Program (TARP) begins, with the government having access to 
the first of two $350 billion tranches of appropriated funds. Wells 
Fargo announces proposal to acquire Wachovia. 
October 14, 2008:  Treasury announces propos al to use TARP funds to purchase 
preferred equity in financial institutions through the $250 billion 
Capital Purchase Program (CPP). Nine large, systemically 
significant financial institutions pledged to subscribe to the 
program for $125 billion. Deadline to apply is November 14, 
2008. 
January 12, 2009:  President George W. Bush submits report to Congress requesting 
disbursement of the remaining $350 billion in TARP funds to be 
used by the incoming Obama administration. 
February 10, 2009: Treasury announc es the details of its Financial Stability Plan, 
which includes stress tests, a capital backstop, as well as new 
lending initiatives and expansions of existing programs. 
February 17, 2009:  The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) is 
passed. In addition to large amounts of stimulus spending and tax 
cuts, ARRA also broadens the original executive compensation 
restrictions for TARP recipients that came with EESA  and gives 
the S ecretary of the Treasury the authority to review 
952
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 65 ---
compensation plans of some of the highest-paid executives of 
TARP recipients. 
February 25, 2009:  Federal bank regulators, such as the FDIC, OCC, and Federal 
Reserve Board announce intent to begin stress te sting US bank 
holding companies with assets exceeding $100 billion . Treasury 
announces the Capital Assistance Program, an unlimited capital 
backstop for banks to receive additional government capital in 
exchange for Convertible Preferred stock. 
April 24, 2009: The Federal Reserve publicly releases a paper about its stress 
testing program, called the Supervisory Capital Assessment 
Program (SCAP), giving key details about the design of the tests, 
as well as how the Fed calculated losses across the firms that  
were tested. 
May 7, 2009:  Results of the SCAP for 19 large financial institutions are released, 
which show a $75 billion capital shortfall for 10 bank holding 
companies, largely in the form of common equity.  
June 10, 2009:  Treasury releases its Inter im Final Rule on TARP Standards for 
Compensation and Corporate Governance. The rule implements 
and further expands the restrictions laid out in ARRA, as well as 
appoints a Special Master for TARP Executive Compensation, 
which is responsible for reviewing c ompensation plans for 
institutions receiving “exceptional assistance”. 
November 9, 2009: The Capital Assistance Program closes after six months. No 
investments are made under the program and all of the bank 
holding companies that need capital as a part of SCAP are able to 
raise it privately. 
July 21, 2010: The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection 
Act of 2010 is passed. The Act establishes the Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau and Financial Stability Oversight Council , 
removes Treasury’s ability to reuse TARP funds, more stringently 
regulates the activities of banks and bank holding companies, and 
institutes mandatory annual stress tests for some of the largest 
bank holding companies and nonbank financial companies. 
953
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 66 ---
Appendix B: Overview of Initial Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests  
Regulatory Guidance 
The Federal Reserve, OCC, and Treasury released several Final Rules in October of 2012, 
which served as implementation and clerical guidelines for regulators and participating 
institutions.  
The first, which was published in by the OCC and Treasury in the Federal Register on October 
9, 2012, laid out the methodology and reporting requirements for participants in detail. 
Unlike in the initial legislation, the Final Rule categoriz ed institutions as either “$10 to $50 
billion covered” or “over $50 billion covered”, based on their average total consolidated 
assets (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 195, 10/09/2012 – p. 61246).29 Regulators gave smaller 
covered institutions (less than $ 50 billion) more than a year longer to both conduct and 
report the results of their stress tests compared with covered institutions of  $50 billion.30 
However, there were cases in which institutions with less than $50 billion in assets were 
affiliated with the covered institutions of more than $50 billion, which meant that it could be 
“less burdensome and more appropriate” for these institutions to follow the requirements 
for covered institutions of more than $50 billion, instead (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 195, 
10/09/2012 – p. 61242). 
Participating institutions were required to estimate PPNR, losses, loan-loss provisions, net 
income, ALLL for credit exposures, and general effects of capital actions on their capital 
levels over the “planning horizon”, which had to be at least nine quarters (Federal Register, 
Vol. 77, No. 195, 10/09/2012 – p. 61247).  
While the initial reports given to regulators were confidential, all participants were required 
to publish the results of the tests either between March 15 and  31 of the following calendar 
year for covered institutions  of more than $50 billion , or between June 15 and 30 of the 
following calendar year for covered institutions of $10 to $50 billion (Federal Register, Vol. 
77, No. 195, 10/09/2012 – p. 61248). For t he first set of results, this would mean that 
covered institutions would have had to publish their results between March 15 to 31, 2013 , 
and June 15 to 30, 2014 (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 195, 10/09/2012 – p. 61248).  
 
29 Average total consolidated assets, for purposes of the Dodd-Frank stress tests, were calculated by taking the 
average of an institution’s total consolidated assets found in its Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income 
for the four most recent consecutive quarters. If a report had not been filed  in one or more of the four most 
recent quarters, it would be calculated as the average of the institution’s total consolidated assets “for the most 
recent one or more consecutive quarters” (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 195, 10/09/2012 – p. 61246). 
30 Covered institutions of $10 to $50 billion were required to use financial statement data as of September 30, 
2013, and report their test results on or before March 31, 2014, whereas covered institutions of $50 billion 
were required to use financial statement data as of September 30, 2012 , and report their results on or before 
January 5, 2013 (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 195, 10/09/2012 – p. 61246). In all cases, data as of September 
30 of the current calendar year had to be used. 
954
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 67 ---
Two more Final Rules were issued on October 12, 2012, for each of the covered groups. While 
the language was similar in the Rules for each of the two groups, and was akin to what was 
issued by the OCC and Treasury, it differed in the following ways:  
(1) A delay in the date that these companies were to begin and publicly report the results of 
their stress tests. A company that met the requirements at the end of 2013 would be tested 
in 2014, and report their results in 2015, for example (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 
10/12/2012 – pp. 62399).31  
(2) Further clarification of the definition of the three “scenarios” that the OCC and Treasury 
had outlined in their Final Rule. The baseline scenario was similar to the SCAP: a consensus 
view of the macroeconomic outlook as represented by forecasters, government agencies, and 
other organizations. The adverse scenario would likely “include the paths of economic 
variables that are generally consistent with mild to moderate recessions ,” with the 
possibility of the approach varying from year-to-year based on current economic conditions. 
The more adverse scenario, on the other hand, was expected to follow the path that was 
consistent with “severe post -war US recessions” (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 
10/12/2012 – pp. 62403-62404).  
(3) An increased emphasis on tailoring stress test elements to idiosyncratic elements among 
tested institutions. The Federal Reserve Board emphasized that, “depending on the systemic 
footprint and scope of operations” of a given institution, they co uld potentially require 
“additional components in its adverse and severely adverse scenarios or to use additional 
scenarios that are designed to capture salient risks stemming from specific lines of business” 
(Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 10/12/2012 – p. 62404).  
(4) A more detailed list of assumptions about capital actions when analyzing the impact of 
the test over the planning horizon. These involved taking into account actual capital actions 
undertaken at the end of the first quarter, as well as payments on any instruments included 
in regulatory capital ratios (such as common stock dividends, interest, or principal 
payments), and an assumption of “no redemption” on any instrument that would be included 
in the institution’s regulatory capital ratios (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 10/12/2012 
– p. 62408). 
(5) Additional stress tests conducted every six months by covered institutions of more than 
$50 billion only. These would be completed by January 5 and June 5 every year, with the 
former following the same procedures and scenarios as the Fed’s tests, while the mid -year 
tests, which were based on asset values as of March 31, were conducted more independently. 
In particular, companies were expected to assess their own unique vulnerabilities and 
 
31 This included a delay for  covered institutions of $10 billion to $50 billion that were eligible for the stress 
tests as of the end of 2012. These institutions, despite being required to report in 2014, did not have to do so 
until June 2015 (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 10/12/2012 – p. 62399). This delay also applied for covered 
institutions of more than $50 billion that did not participate in SCAP, who would begin testing in September 
2013 instead of November 2012 (Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 10/12/2012 – p. 62381). 
955
The US Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP) Lawson

--- Page 68 ---
idiosyncratic risks as part of the adverse and more adverse scenarios in the mid -year tests 
(Federal Register, Vol. 77, No. 198, 10/12/2012 – pp. 62387).  
These Final Rules and related publications further built on the foundations that the SCAP 
created, and t he Fed continues to release both the DFAST results and methodology to the 
public (FRB: Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests).  
Copyright 2019, 2021 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to 
receive permission to reprint any or a ll of this document, please contact the Yale Program on 
Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
 
956
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3