--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 2 
2021 
Lessons Learned: Neel Kashkari Lessons Learned: Neel Kashkari 
Yasemin Esmen 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Public Administration Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public 
Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Esmen, Yasemin (2021) "Lessons Learned: Neel Kashkari," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 2, 
789-791. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1157 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss2/38 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss2/38

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Neel Kashkari 
By Yasemin Sim Esmen 
Neel Kashkari was the Interim Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Financial Stability 
between October 2008 and May 2009. He oversaw the architecture and administration of the 
Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) during this time. This “Lessons Learned” is based on a 
phone interview with Mr. Kashkari. 
When implementing a program such as the TARP, there needs to be a balance so we 
can make sure institutions will participate.  
When designing the TARP, Kashkari and his team had to make sure that the terms were not 
too onerous for banks so that they would not be deterred from participating in the program. 
He says, “It is like making medicine taste good for children so they will take it.” 
The banks’ participation, on the other hand, was critical to the program’s success and, in turn, 
the survival of the financial system. On the other hand, there were political pressures to make 
it onerous to the banks so that it did not look like the government was bailing out fail ing 
institutions with taxpayers’ money. 
However, beyond any political concerns, the main focus of Mr. Kashkari’s team was 
stabilizing the financial system and preventing it from a collapse.  “We erred on the side of 
designing our programs so that banks woul d use it and we could stabilize the system ,” he 
says. “I think that was effective.” 
Putting together the right team is important when building a program from scratch. 
Mr. Kashkari was put in charge of building a $700 billion program from scratch during the 
time of a presidential transition. Although he was a political appointee, he stayed on several 
months after the transition to see the successful implementation of the program.  
While building the program itself, Mr. Kashkari was simultaneously hiring the people who 
would help build and run the program. He focused on hiring non -partisan professional 
people who would stay on to work with the next administration:  
[W]e […] had really talented people to choose from , and we needed a mix of skills: 
people from within the government who do want to get stuff done in government, but 
people who also had experience in financial markets. 
As the crisis was getting worse each day, Mr. Kashkari and his team had to work fast. They 
were designing and implementing their programs while continuing to hire people to carry 
out those roles. 
 
789

--- Page 4 ---
We need to make sure banks can cover their losses so they will not need a bailout in a 
future crisis. “Too big to fail” is a systemic risk. 
Kashkari believes that w hile the Dodd -Frank Act brought a lot of measures to stabilize our 
financial system, it did not go far enough for it did not raise capital requirements high 
enough. Analyses by the Minneapolis Fed (where Kashkari is the president at the time of this 
interview) showed that post -crisis the biggest banks did not have enough capital of their 
own to weather another crisis and would, therefore, need bailing out again. Kashkari objects 
to this: 
The banks are stronger than they were . Dodd Frank did do some good, but it did not 
go far enough. [Regulations] need to make sure banks could actually cover their own 
losses and protect the taxpayers. 
Kashkari believes that the biggest challenge in front of this is a political one because big 
banks are powerful lobbyists and fund political campaigns. “ It is a political problem more 
than it is an economic problem or a policy problem ,” he says.  “We know what to do. The 
challenge is finding the political will to do it.”  
The banks could argue that raising their capital requirements would make them lose their 
competitive edge internationally if other countries do not require similar measures. 
Kashkari responds this way: “My answer is simply, well, if other countries want to take huge 
risks with their financial systems, then let them do that. That does not mean we need to do 
that.” 
There is also another, very strong point against the banks’ argument according to Kashkari,  
The biggest banks in America that do have more capital than European banks are 
outcompeting the European banks. Capital has not been a competitive disadvantage; 
it has probably been a competitive advantage. So, their arguments collapse when 
anybody looks at them carefully. 
When facing an economic crisis, we should overreact in our measures to fight it before 
it gets too big. 
The response to the financial crisis of 2008 -09 was slow and gradual, while the crisis grew 
each day. This, in turn, caused it to get bigger than it would have if there had been a decisive 
reaction at the start. Part of the reason behind this slow reaction was that policymakers could 
not foresee how big the crisis was going to get, so they did not want to overreact. Kashkari 
crystallizes what he learned this way: 
When the downside is a devastating recession, as we saw in 2009, what we could be 
facing now [this interview was done in March 2020,] the right answer is, in fact, to 
overreact. I think we have learned that lesson and, in turn, that is moving much more 
aggressively today than we did 10 years ago. 
790
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
It is also better to keep the interventions as broad as possible. 
Kashkari also echo es other commenters who had stressed that broad interventions add 
value in improving confidence in the wider rescue an d system recovery. As a counterpoint , 
he references that some of the TARP’s programs were targeted towards the housing crisis 
and helping homeowners. However, he notes that in some respects these programs were too 
targeted: 
Our response was targeted because many Americans were angry, thinking that maybe 
their neighbor had been irresponsible and were wondering why their neighbor 
should have their mortgage forgiven. So, we tried to help homeowners who only 
needed a little bit of help. 
But, he comments, that slowed down the program and narrowed its effectiveness:  
That, in hindsight, was a mistake. What I have learned is that, when you need to do 
these bailouts, it is much better to be generous and not worry about bailing out people 
who do not de serve it because, overall, the economy will be helped if you are more 
generous with assistance. 
_____________________________________ 
Date: June 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2020-03 
 
 
791
Lessons Learned: Neel Kashkari Esmen