--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 3 
2021 
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans 
Shiro Kawana 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Policy 
Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kawana, Shiro (2021) "Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 3, 
351-366. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1215 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss3/18 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss3/18

--- Page 3 ---
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans1 
Shiro Kawana2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
June 26, 2018; Revised: November 12, 2021 
Abstract 
During the international financial turmoil  associated with the Global Financial Crisis, 
Japan’s financial institutions remained relatively sound because their exposure to overseas 
structured credit products was limited. R estructuring in the aftermath of Japan’s own 
banking crisis in  the late 1990s  also contributed to making Japanese banks resilient to 
external shocks.  Nonetheless, Japanese banks’ profitability was at risk. Due to the large 
amount of stockholdings, major banks had large market risks which might significantly 
worsen their capital ratio s. The increasing volatilit y of stock prices could make banks  
conscious of capital constraints in the future and could trigger an adverse feedback loop 
between the financ ial system and the economy. Against the downside risks, on March 17, 
2009, the Bank of Japan ( BOJ) announced a new framework to provide subordinated loans 
to major banks that were subject to international capital standards as a safeguard. The 
framework was formally established at a regular meeting of the Policy Board of the BOJ on 
April 10, 2009. Four auctions were held under the framework, but only one bank made a 
bid. Reflecting the improvement of market condition s, the framework ended by the end of 
March 2010 as planned at the launch. The scheme was completed  when the bank fully 
repaid its ¥20 billion ($209 million) loan on the earliest day allowed under the contract.  
Keywords: Bank of Japan, recapitalization, subordinated loan, stock price 
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering the responses to the global financial crisis that pertain to broad-based capital injection 
programs. Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Research Intern, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
351

--- Page 4 ---
At a Glance  
During the international financial turmoil  
associated with the Global Financial Crisis, 
Japan’s financial institutions remained 
relatively sound because their exposure to 
overseas structured credit produc ts was 
limited. Restructuring since Japan’s own 
banking crisis in the late 1990s also 
contributed to mak ing Japanese banks 
resilient to external shocks. Nonetheless, 
Japanese banks’ profitability w as at risk. 
Due to the large amount of stock holdings, 
major banks had large market risks which 
might significantly worsen their capital 
ratios. The increasing volatility of stock 
prices had the potential to make banks 
increasingly conscious of capital constraints 
in the future and could trigger an adverse 
feedback loop between the financial system 
and the economy (Bank of Japan 2009b).  
Against the downside risks, on March 17, 
2009, the Bank of Japan ( BOJ) announced a 
new framework to provide subordinated 
loans to major banks that were subject to 
international capital standards as a safeguard. The framework was formally established at 
a regular meeting of the Policy Board of the BOJ on April 10, 2009.  Four auctions were held 
under the framework, but only one bank made a bid. Reflecting the improvement of market 
conditions, the framework ended by the  end of March 2010 , as planned at the beginning. 
The scheme was completed when the bank fully repaid its ¥20 billion ($209 million)  loan 
on the earliest day allowed under the contract.  
Summary Evaluation 
There has been little  evaluation of the provision o f subordinated loans. It is difficult to 
assess the effectiveness of the program because the program was established as a backstop 
to prevent banks from becoming conscious of capital constraints in the future. The 
reactions of market participants at the an nouncement of the framework were mixed. Some 
analysts said that the program would help banks looking to issue subordinated debt and 
boost their Tier -II capital. On the other hand, another analyst argued that it was “more 
symbolic than anything ” because core, Tier-I capital was what the market watched closely  
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: To provide subordinated loans for major 
banks that had large market risks, thereby reducing 
the risk of future capital constraints that could 
trigger an adverse feedback loop between the 
financial system and the economy. 
Announcement Date  March 17, 2009 (Bank 
of Japan 2009b) 
Operational Date April 10, 2009 
Expiration Date  June 29, 2012  
Legal Authority Bank of Japan, 
Authorization for the 
exception under Article 
43 (Minister of Finance 
Prime Minister) 
Peak Utilization  One bank with ¥20 
billion ($209 million) 
Administration Bank of Japan 
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans 
352
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
and because Japanese major banks were already able to raise subordinated debt in the 
market.  
At the first auction on May 29, only Sumitomo Trust & Banking Co., the eighth largest bank 
in Ja pan at the end of March 2009, made a successful bid for a ¥20 billion perpetual 
subordinated loan at the minimum spread (210bp). There was no bid for 10 -year 
subordinated loans at the auction, and no banks took part in the remaining three auctions.  
  
353
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans Kawana

--- Page 6 ---
Japan Context 2008–2009  
GDP 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$5.32 trillion in 2008 
$5.53 trillion in 2009 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted to 
USD) 
$39,339 in 2008 
$40,855 in 2009 
Sovereign credit rating (five-year senior 
debt) 
 
Data for Q4 2008: 
Fitch: AA- 
Moody’s: Aa3 
S&P: AA 
Data for Q4 2009: 
Fitch: AA- 
Moody’s: Aa2 
S&P: AA 
Size of banking system 
 
$8.41 trillion in 2008 
$9.57 trillion in 2009 
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
GDP 
 
156.01% in 2008 
173.23% in 2009 
Size of banking system as a percentage of 
financial system 
 
52.07% in 2008 
54.39% in 2009 
Five-bank concentration of banking system 
 
58.64% in 2008 
58.71% in 2009 
Foreign involvement in banking system Data not available for 2008 
Data not available for 2009 
Government ownership of banking system Data not available for 2008 
Data not available for 2009 
Existence of deposit insurance Yes in 2008 
Yes in 2009 
Sources: Bloomberg, World Bank Global Financial Development Database, World Bank 
Deposit Insurance Dataset. 
354
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
Although Japan’s financial system remained relatively stable , on the whole, during the 
Global Financial C risis, the strains in global financial markets and worsening economic 
conditions at home and abroad negatively affected the financial intermediation function 
and robustness of the system in Japan . Reflecting the declining function of commercial 
paper and corporate bond markets, financial conditions for firms’ funding in capital market 
deteriorated beginning in the  autumn of 2008. Japan’s financial institutions, which had 
shown robustness to a certain degree amid the turbulence of the global financial system, 
retained financial intermediation function and supported firms through the increase of 
lending as shown in Figure 1 below. As Japanese banks had been fortifying their financial 
bases since Japan’s own banking crisis in the 1990s  and had limited exposure to overseas 
structured credit products, their business was relatively sound compared to foreign 
counterparts. However, market risk associated with stockholdings increased, especially for 
major banks, and credit risk that had previously been in decline also turned  upward as 
shown in Figures 1 and 2  below. A substantial amount of both realized and unrealized 
losses on stockholdings had been reported amid a leveling off in the outstanding value of 
banks’ stockholdings. Given the increased volatility of stock prices, the management of 
market risk associated with stockholdings remained an important challenge for banks . The 
Financial System Report (FSR) in March 2009  pointed out that even under the assumption 
of future economic downturns with different degrees of severit y, the banking sector ’s 
expected losses were not so large that banks ’ Tier-I capital ratios would substantially 
deteriorate. However, the FSR warned that if banks became more conscious of capital 
constraints in the future, the decline of stock price s could have a negative impact on 
financial intermediation from a macro perspective (Bank of Japan 2009a).  
Recognizing the risks of a potential adverse feedback loop between the financ ial system  
and the economy, the Bank of Ja pan ( BOJ) announced a new framework to provide 
subordinated loans to banks after the regular m eeting of the Policy Board  on March 17, 
2009. This measure aimed to ensure the smooth functioning of financial intermediation 
and the stability of Japan ’s financial system  “by enabling Jap an’s banks to maintain 
sufficient capital bases even in severe financial and economic environments ” (Bank of 
Japan 2009b).  
  
355
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans Kawana

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1: Bank Loans Outstanding by Type of Borrower (Left) and Bank 
Stockholdings (Right) 
  
Source: Bank of Japan 2009a, 15, 22.  
Figure 2: Risks and Tier-I Capital (Left) and Dispersion of Tier-I Capital Ratios Where 
Both Economic Downturn and Stagnating Stock Price Occur (Right) 
  
Source: Bank of Japan 2009a, 29, 34.  
 
356
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
Program Description 
On April 10, 2009, the BOJ decided to set “ Principal Terms and Conditions for Provision of 
Subordinated Loans” at a regular meeting  of the Policy Board  and released the outline of 
the framework on the same day . The program was created as a temporary measure and 
planned to close new loan disbursement by the end of March 2010 (Bank of Japan 2009c).  
Under the new f ramework, the BOJ offered  10-year subordinated loans and perpetu al 
subordinated loans, which could  be counted as Tier-II capital under  Basel II, to the banks 
that were subject to international capital standards up to  ¥350 billion 3 for each bank and 
¥1 trillion in total (Bank of Japan 2009c; Whipp and Dickie 2009) . The loan did not require 
collateral. Recipients of each loan ha d the right to redeem the loan beginning three years 
later after disbursement. To incentivize financial institutions to repay the borrowed fund s 
as soon as possible,  the interest rate would increase  by 1.5% after five years of loan 
disbursement (Bank of Japan 2009c). 
The size of each loan and interest rates for the first five years on the  10-year and perpetual 
loans were determined at auctions using a premium over the six -month yen LIBOR  (Bank 
of Japan 2009c).  
A multiple-price competitive auction was conducted for each loan in which banks bid “yield 
spreads,” which were calculated by subtracting the “minimum spreads” determined by the 
Bank of Japan from the spread which banks desire d to add on the base rate (six -month yen 
LIBOR) (Bank of Japan 2009c). 
The minimum spread wa s set by the BOJ at each auction for 10 -year loans and perpetual 
loans, in light of market conditions, so as not to interfere with capital raising by financial 
institutions through markets. The minimum spread for each auction was released about ten 
days before each auction (Bank of Japan 2009c).  
The auction schedule was published on May 8; the auctions were held on May 29, August 
27, November 26, and February 24, 2010  (Bank of Japan, n.d.) . The total amount of loans 
and the average spread in  each auction were released  after each auction . The na mes of 
recipients of the loans we re not published after each auction but were released around the 
end of May 2010 (Bank of Japan 2009c). 
The new scheme was designed to complement the two other channels for financial 
institutions to raise capital : (1) capital raising b y financial institutions  themselves in the 
market, and (2) capital raising based on the Act on Special Measures for Strengthe ning 
Financial Functions, which was amended on December 16, 2008,4 and provided public 
 
3 In April 2009, the monthly average exchange rate was $1 = ¥99 (International Monetary Fund  Exchange 
Rates Database).  
4 The Act on Special Measures for Strengthening Financial Functions, which enabled  the Japanese government 
to inject capital into financial institutions, was first introduced in 2004 but expired in March 2008. In 
December 2008, the law was amended to extend the scheme to the end of March 2012 and to lower the bar 
for banks to apply for the scheme.  
357
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans Kawana

--- Page 10 ---
funds as Tier-I capital (Shirakawa 2009) . The provision of subordinated loans aim ed to 
provide anothe r channel for major banks, which  were directly affected by the pote ntial 
decline of stock price s, to raise Tier-II capital (Shirakawa 2009; Whipp and Dickie 2009) . 
For banks that were not eligible for the provision of subordinated loans, including regional 
banks and cooperative banks, capital injection of public funds based on the Act on Special 
Measures for Strengthening Financial Functions was the measure intended to help them to 
strengthen their balance sheets (Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan 2009).  
At a press conference on March 18, where the BOJ released the idea of providing 
subordinated loans, BOJ Governor Masaaki Shirakawa said that the new scheme was 
created as a safeguard and market funding was preferred (Reuters Staff 2009) . He 
indicated that the value of the scheme could not be assessed simply by the amount of loans 
under the scheme as the scheme was designed as a safeguard (Whipp and Dickie 2009). 
Outcomes 
The auctions were held  on May 29, 2009; August 27, 2009; November 26, 2009; and 
February 24,  2010 (Bank of Japan, n.d.) . At the first auction on May 29, only Sumitomo 
Trust & Banking Co., the eighth largest bank in Japan at the end of March 2009, made a 
successful bid for a ¥20 billion perpetual subordinated loan at the minimum spread 
(210bp) (Bank of Japan, n.d.; Koenig 2009) . There was no bid for 10 -year subordinated 
loans at the auction, and no banks took part in the remaining three auctions (Bank of Japan, 
n.d.).  
Although the BOJ did not publish the name of banks that bid for loan s, Nikkei reported on 
May 29 that six banks did not take part in the auction , and Sumitomo Trust & Banking Co. 
would receive a loan (Bloomberg 2009).  
As planned in the “Principal Terms and Conditions for Provision of Subordinated Loans, ” 
the period of new loan dis bursement came to an end in  March 2010 (Bank of Japan 2009c; 
n.d.). On June 11, 2012, just three years after the disbursement, Sumitomo Trust & Banking 
Co. fully redeemed the loan, and the scheme was complete (Bank of Japan 2012; 2013). 
  
358
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a Package: The provision of subordinated loans was intended to 
complement capital raising in the market and was authorized through the Act on 
Special Measures for Strengthening Financial Functions. 
The provision of subordinated loans for banks by the BOJ was designed to fill the gap of 
financing tools for banks. The BOJ expected that the new framework would contribute to 
strengthening the banks’ capital base in combination with capital raising in the market by 
the banks themselves and from the Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan (DICJ) under 
the Act on Special Measures for Strengthening Financial Functions, which was amended in 
December 2008 to encourage broader use (Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan 2009).  
To reduce the risks associated with banks’ stockholdings, the BOJ also decided to resume 
purchases of stocks held by financia l institutions in February 2009 so that they co uld 
handle the risk associated with stockholdings  (Bank of Japan 2009b) . The BOJ continued 
these purchases until the end of April 2010  (Bank of Japan 2010) . The BOJ had first 
introduced the stock purchasing program in 2002, in response to the Japanese fina ncial 
crisis, but it expired at the end of 2004 (Reuters Staff 2009).  
2. Legal Authority: The framework was established as an exception to the Bank of 
Japan Act by obtaining authorization from the Minister of Finance and Prime 
Minister. 
Although the BOJ recognized that the provision of subordinated  loans to banks by a central 
bank was an e xtremely extraordinary measure , no additional legislation was required  to 
establish the new framework (Bank of Japan 2009b). Under Article 33 of the Bank of Japan 
Act, t he BOJ, as the lender of last resort, could provide financial institutions with loans 
against collateral in the form of negotiable instruments, government securities, and other 
securities. However, the BOJ could not extend loans without collateral under Ar ticle 33 of 
the Ac t. Instead, the new framework for the  provision of subordinated loans was 
introduced as “Other Business” that was authorized by the Minister of Finance and the 
Prime Minister. Article 43 of the Act stipulates that t he BOJ may not conduct any business 
other than that specified by the  Act as the business of the Bank ; however, the BOJ can 
conduct other business that is necessary to achieve the Bank’s purpose specified by the Act 
by obtaining  authorization from the Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister . The BOJ 
requested authorization from the Minister of Finance and Prime Minister to introduce the 
framework to provide subordinated loans  to maintain the stability of the financial system  
(Bank of Japan 1997) . This exception was also applied  to the stock purchasing program by 
the BOJ that started in 2002 and resumed in 2009.  
3. Size: The overall size of the program was set at ¥1 trillion. 
The t otal amount of loans available through the program was set  at ¥1 trillion  (Bank of 
Japan 2009b).  
359
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans Kawana

--- Page 12 ---
4. Individual Participation Limits: The cap on a single bank’s participation was set 
at ¥350 billion. 
In addition to the limit on total amount of loans, there was a limit on the amount of loans 
per bank at ¥350 billion (Bank of Japan 2009b). 
5. Eligible Institutions: Eligible institutions were Japanese banks that were subject 
to international capital standards.  
Only the banks that were subject to international capital standards were eligible  (Bank of 
Japan 2009c) . As a result, most regional banks and all cooperative banks and credit 
associations were not eligible for the loans  (Whipp and Dickie 2009) . The BOJ created the 
framework to support large banks that were expected to suffer significant losses directly 
from sharp declines in stock prices, to raise Tier -II capital as a complementary measure for 
capital raising through the market  (Reuters Staff 2009; Shirakawa 2009) . Banks that were 
not eligible for the provision of subordinated loans, including regional banks and 
cooperative banks, could raise Tier -I capital under the Act on Special Measures for 
Strengthening Financial Functions, which provided public funds in exchange for priority 
stocks (Bank of Japan 2009a, 10; Shirakawa 2009). 
By setting a relatively limited target, the BOJ was able to reduce the risk of default . To 
receive loans under the framework, banks were required to be deemed creditworthy, but 
the BOJ did not conduct any additional investigation when it conducted the loan  (Bank of 
Japan 2009c). 
6. The capital was provided via subordinated loans redeemable after three years. 
This program focused on providing a channel to strengthen the balance sheet of major 
banks through providing Tier-II capital  (Bank of Japan 2009d, 64; 2009b) . Since the 
government had already enacted the Act on Special Measures for Strengthening Financial 
Functions in December 2008, financial institutions had a tool to raise Tier-I capital outside 
the market. The provision of subordinated loans by the BOJ can be seen as a supplemental 
measure to provide capital (Shirakawa 2009). 
Recipients of each loan had the right to repay the loan beginning three years after 
disbursement (Bank of Japan 2009c). 
7. Maturities of the loans were either 10-year or perpetual. 
The term of the loan  provided under this framework wa s either 10-year or perpetual  in 
order to meet the requirement for Tier-II capital under Basel II. Auctions were held 
separately for 10-year and perpetual loans (Bank of Japan 2009c). 
8. The amount and the spread for each loan were determined by auctions.  
The amount of each loan and interest rates for the first five years on the  10-year and 
perpetual loans were  determined at auctions using a premium over the six -month yen 
360
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
LIBOR. Targeted banks were not required to take part in  the auction. The potential 
drawback of using auction was that banks might avoid participating in the auctions for fear 
of suffering stigma. The BOJ determined minimum spread at each auction for 10-year loans 
and perpetual loans respectively, in light of m arket conditions so as not to interfere with 
capital raising by financial institutions through markets (Bank of Japan 2009c). Banks were 
incentivized to raise capital through markets and repay the loan as soon as possible.  
9. Capital Characteristics – Pricing: The interest rate would rise after five years to 
penalize banks that did not exit. 
The interest rate  would increase by 1.5% after five years of loan disbursement  (Bank of 
Japan 2009c). This increase may have reflected the intention of the BOJ that the provision 
of subordinated loans under the framework should be used only as a temporary measure.  
10. Nondisclosure rules were applied for the auctions. 
The BOJ decided that it would  not release the names of banks that participate d in the 
auctions until the end of May 2010. Only the total amount of loans and the average spread 
in each auction were released  after each auction  (Bank of Japan 2009b) . The anonymity 
could have been intended for b anks to avoid the stigma associated with accessing capital 
from the BOJ . However, the name of the participant was reported on media just after the 
auction as shown in Figure 5 below.  
Figure 5: Snapshot of Articles Reporting Participation in First Auction 
“(BN) Six Banks Won’t Take Part in Bank of Japan Auction, Nikkei Says ”                2009-05-28 
17:12:30.693 GMT Bloomberg By Heather Burke 
May 29 (Bloomberg) -- Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ Ltd. and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp. are 
among six financial institutions not participating in the Bank of Japan’s first auction to offer 
subordinated loans to help the banks shore up capital, Nikkei English News reported, without saying 
where it got the information. 
 “Sumitomo Trust to Get Loan Under Bank  of Japan Plan, Nikkei Says ”                  2009-05-29 
17:14:15.608 GMT Bloomberg By Bill Koenig  
May 30 (Bloomberg) -- Sumitomo Trust & Banking Co. will receive a 20 billion yen ($209 million) 
subordinated loan under a framework established by the Bank of Japan, Nikkei English  News 
reported, without saying how it obtained the information. The Bank of Japan in March disclosed plans 
to auction subordinated loans to banks with international operations as part of a plan to boost their 
capital, Nikkei said. 
 
Source: Koenig 2009; Bloomberg 2009. 
11. The end date of the program was set for March 2010. 
The framework was established  as a temporary measure which would end at the end of 
March 2010. Reflecting the recovery of the financial market, the framework was not 
361
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans Kawana

--- Page 14 ---
extended. The last auction was held in February 2010 and closed new loan disbursement as 
initially scheduled (Bank of Japan, n.d.; 2009c).   
III. Evaluation 
There has been little  evaluation of the provision of subordinated loans. It is difficult to 
assess the effectiveness of the program because the program was established as a backstop 
to prevent banks from becoming conscious of capital constraints in the future. Only one 
bank received a subordinated loan  under the framework, but the limited number of uses 
does not imply the ineffectiveness of the policy . If the stock price had slumped further, 
more banks could have relied on the framework to strengthen their capital bases.  
The reactions of market participants at the announcement of the framework were mixed. 
Some analysts said that the program would help banks looking to issue subordinated debt 
and boost their Tier -II capital (Whipp and Dickie 2009; Reuters Staff 2009) . On the other 
hand, another analyst argued that it was “more symbolic than anything” because core, Tier-
I capital was what the market watched closely  and because Japanese major banks were 
able to raise subordinated debt in the market (Reuters Staff 2009).  
IV. References 
Bank of Japan. 1997. Bank of Japan Act (Unofficial English Translation).  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-japan-act-unofficial-english-translation. 
———. 2009a. “Financial System Report (March 2009).” Bank of Japan Reports & Research 
Papers. Bank of Japan. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-system-report. 
———. 2009b. “Provision of Subordinated Loans to Banks.” March 17, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/provision-subordinated-loans-banks. 
———. 2009c. “Establishment of ‘Principal Terms and Conditions for Provision of 
Subordinated Loans.’”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/establishment-principal-terms-and-conditions-
provision-subordinated-loans. 
———. 2009d. “Financial System Report  (September 2009) .” Bank of Japan Reports & 
Research Papers. Bank of Japan.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-system-report-0. 
———. 2010 . “Termination of the Stock Purchasing Program.” Bank of Japan. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/termination-stock-purchasing-program. 
———. 2012. “ 劣後特約付貸付の任意弁済について  (About Voluntary Repayment of 
Subordinated Loan).” June 11, 2012.  
362
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/liehouteyuefudaifunorenyibianjinitsuite-about-
voluntary-repayment-subordinated-loan. 
———. 2013. “Annual Review 2013.” Japan: Bank of Japan.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-review-2013. 
———. n.d. “Schedule and Results of Auctions for the Provision of Subordinated Loans.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/schedule-and-results-auctions-provision-subordinated-
loans. 
Bloomberg. 2009. “Six Banks Won’t Take Part in Bank of Japan Auction, Nikkei Says,” May 
28, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/six-banks-wont-take-part-bank-japan-auction-nikkei-
says. 
Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan. 2009. “Annual Report 2008/2009.” De posit 
Insurance Corporation of Japan.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-20082009. 
Koenig, Bill. 2009. “Sumitomo Trust to Get Loan Under Bank of Japan Plan, Nikkei Say.” 
Bloomberg, May 29, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sumitomo-trust-get-loan-under-bank-japan-plan-
nikkei-says. 
Reuters Staff. 2009. “UPDATE 2 -BOJ Offers $10.2 Bln Subordinated Loans to Banks.” 
Reuters, March 17, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/update-2-boj-offers-102-bln-subordinated-loans-banks. 
Shirakawa, Masaaki. 2009. “Address at a Meeting with Banks’ Top Management on 
Provision of Subordinated Loans.” Bank of Japan.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/address-meeting-banks-top-management-provision-
subordinated-loans. 
Whipp, Lindsay, and Mure Dickie. 2009 . “BoJ Drafts Y1,000bn of Bank Loan Aid.” Financial 
Times, March 17, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/boj-drafts-y1000bn-bank-loan-aid. 
V. Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
Establishment of “Principal Terms and Conditions for Provision of Subo rdinated Loans ” 
(BOJ 2009c).   
BOJ document outlining the key terms of the Provision of Subordinated Loan Program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/establishment-principal-terms-and-conditions-
provision-subordinated-loans.  
363
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans Kawana

--- Page 16 ---
Implementation Documents 
Establishment of “Principal Terms and Conditions for Provision of Subordinated Loans ” 
(Bank of Japan 2009c).   
BOJ document outlining the key terms of the Provision of Subordinated Loan Program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/establishment-principal-terms-and-conditions-
provision-subordinated-loans.  
Schedule and Results of Auctions for the Provision of Subordinated Loans (Bank of Japan 
n.d.). 
Schedule of auctions and the results of all auctions.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/schedule-and-results-auctions-provision-subordinated-
loans. 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
Bank of Japan Act (Bank of Japan 1997)   
Unofficial translation of the Bank of Japan Act.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-japan-act-unofficial-english-translation. 
日本銀行業務方法書 (Bank of Japan Statement of Operation Procedures).   
Operational procedures of the BOJ , defining the terms of the Provision of Subordinated Loan 
Program. Since the program had already expired in 2012, the  relevant article was deleted.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ribenyinxingyewufangfashu-bank-japan-statement-
operation-procedures. 
Press Releases/Announcements 
Address at a Meeting with Banks' Top Management on Provision of Subordinated Loans 
(Shirakawa. 2009).   
Then-Governor Masaaki Shirakawa explaining the background and the BOJ’s view on the 
decision.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/address-meeting-banks-top-management-provision-
subordinated-loans. 
Establishment of “Principal Terms and Co nditions for Provision of Subordinated Loans ” 
(Bank of Japan 2009c).   
BOJ document outlining the key terms of the Provision of Subordinated Loan Program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/establishment-principal-terms-and-conditions-
provision-subordinated-loans.  
Provision of Subordinated Loans to Banks (Bank of Japan 2009b).   
BOJ press release introducing the Provision of Subordinated Loan Program. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/provision-subordinated-loans-banks. 
364
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
劣後特約付貸付にかかる貸付先名の公表について (Announcement o f the name of the 
lender  for the subordinated  loan).  
BOJ press release document announcing the borrower bank of the subordinated loan under 
the program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/liehouteyuefudaifunikakarudaifuxianmingnogongbiaoni
tsuite-announcement-name-lender.  
劣後特約付貸付の任意弁済について (About voluntary repayment of subordinated loan).   
BOJ press release documen t announcing that all the loan  under the pr ogram was redeemed. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/liehouteyuefudaifunorenyibianjinitsuite-about-
voluntary-repayment-subordinated-loan.  
The Bank of Japan to Resume Stock Purchases Held by Financial Institutions.   
BOJ press release announcing the resumption of the stock-purchasing program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-japan-resume-stock-purchases-held-financial-
institutions.  
Media Stories 
BoJ drafts Y1,000bn of bank loan aid (Whipp and Dickie 2009).   
Article discussing the introduction of the Provision of Subordinated Loans Program . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/boj-drafts-y1000bn-bank-loan-aid. 
UPDATE 2-BOJ offers $10.2 bln subordinated loans to banks (Reuters Staff 009).   
Article discussing the introduction  of the Subordinated Loans program. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/update-2-boj-offers-102-bln-subordinated-loans-banks.  
Six Banks Won’t Take Part in Bank of Japan Auction, Nikkei Says (Bloomberg 2009).   
Article reporting that six banks would not participate in the first auction of the Provision of 
Subordinated Loans Program.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/six-banks-wont-take-part-bank-japan-auction-nikkei-
says.  
Sumitomo Trust to Get Loan Under Bank of Japan Plan, Nikkei Says (Koenig 2009).   
Article reporting that Sumitomo Trust & Banking Co. would receive a 200 billion yen 
subordinated loan under the Provision of Subordinated Loans Program.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sumitomo-trust-get-loan-under-bank-japan-plan-
nikkei-says.  
Reports/Assessments 
Financial System Report (Bank of Japan 2009a).   
The BOJ’s analysis on the market development and the robustness of the financial system.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-system-report. 
365
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans Kawana

--- Page 18 ---
Financial System Report (Bank of Japan 2009d).   
The BOJ’s analysis on the market development and the robustness of the financial system.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-system-report-0. 
Annual Review 2013  (Bank of Japan 2013).   
The BOJ’s annual report noting financial statements showing the repayment of the 
subordinated loan.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-review-2013. 
 
Copyright 2021 © Yale University. All rights reserved . To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
366
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 3