--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 3 Issue 4 
2021 
Lessons Learned: Jenni LeCompte Lessons Learned: Jenni LeCompte 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Business and Corporate Communications Commons, Economic History Commons, 
Economic Policy Commons, Public Administration Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public 
Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2021) "Lessons Learned: Jenni LeCompte," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 3 : Iss. 4, 
28-30. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1239 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss4/3 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol3/iss4/3

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
Jenni LeCompte 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Jenni LeCompte was deputy assistant secretary in charge of public affairs operations at the 
Treasury Department during the Global Financial Crisis and later became assistant secretary, 
public affairs. She  coordinated communications, served as a spokesperso n, and advised 
Secretary Timothy Geithner during the crisis. This “Lessons Learned” is based on an interview 
with Ms. LeCompte. 
Find the right mix of channels for your message. 
Information is now being disseminated in real time and over social media; those  factors 
have to be included in communications plans. But some of those channels are not 
conducive to thoughtful policy discussions. LeCompte advise d that communicators should 
find “the balance of the platforms and the formats that you can engage on, that are 
accessible and nimble but also appropriate for Treasury, that do allow a little bit more 
space and context around what you re communicating.” 
The Treasury Department “is always going to be more reserved  . . . just because of the 
market-moving nature of  so much of the work that is happening there,” sa id LeCompte. 
Communications will continue to evolve, but it will always be “a bit of a unique entity ,” she 
continued:  
It’s impossible to say what the communications environment looks like when the 
next cris is hits, but  try to find that balance of what vehicles allow you to move 
nimbly and give you the space to explain substance. To make sure that you are 
getting context and the meat of the policy out there but doing so in ways that are not 
constrained to the extent that Twitter does for characters and that kind of thing. 
The department eventually launched its own Treasury Notes blog, which allowed the staff 
to share information in more depth, but at a faster speed.  
Dipping our toes in the social media waters at the time, the blog really did emerge as 
a very key tool, because it allowed us to do shorter posts, move things a little bit 
more nimbly, and with more color than just a press release could. We could do some 
more opinion writing from some of our top of ficials, without necessarily needing to 
go through the gates of an op-ed page editor or the like. 
To build up your team, draft key insiders and demand head count. 
LeCompte was one of the first appointees who arrived with Treasury Secretary Timothy 
Geithner in January 2009, with the transition to the new administration. Because t he 
communications department was relatively small, with few career staff and with all of the 
28

--- Page 4 ---
appointees from the Bush administration departing, the group was “severely understaffed 
right out of the gate.”  
LeCompte praise d Michele Davis, head of communications for former Secretary [Hank] 
Paulson, with facilitating the transition and helping “bridge some of that connectivity ,” but 
the team never had enough staff to handle the volume of media during the crisis. “True fact, 
that our spokesperson for TARP would get up and go to the men ’s room and come back and 
have an entirely full voicemail box,” she recalled. Further, she said: 
We needed to load up our team in terms of staff. Bu t even then, expand to have 
additional spokespeople who could help field the inquiries, be engaging on a regular 
and accessible fashion with the reporters. [Mean]while working internally with the 
policy teams to try to work along the way to get smart on the policy, so that we were 
well poised to explain it when it was ready to be put forward.  
LeCompte stressed that the communications staff must get up to speed while at the same 
time learning the lay of the land. “Trying to find the road forward from a standing start is a 
tough bar to achieve,’’ she said. Her recommendation: “Bring as many veterans to the effort 
as possible and really push to have the resources within the department that are g oing to 
give you the muscle to meet the moment.” She saw this eventually happen at Treasury: 
There was , from the beginning to the end of the Obama administration, definitely 
growth in the public affairs team that we had at Treasury. I think that was a good  
investment in terms of giving as much capacity to that team as possible to do a 
really important function in normal times, but also, especially in those crisis 
moments.  
Insist that Communications has a seat at the table and  dedicate bodies to public 
education. 
Communications is not always an administrative priority, especially in the middle of a 
crisis. Public affairs needs to be up to speed with the resources and information to explain 
policy and decisions to the press and, through them, to the public. T he communications 
staff needs to be able to speak with authority and knowledge. LeCompte expounded: 
Very frequently, policies would be finalized moments before we were moving them 
out to the press. So the job of the communicators was to sort of digest and learn in 
almost real time, as we were explaining to reporters. It was certainly not an ideal 
circumstance, but definitely something that the pace and the heat of the moment 
brought upon us, like it or not.  
Secretary Geithner was not a natural communicator  coming into the office (he would say 
that himself, says LeCompte) and freeing h im and other officials to appear on television or 
brief reporters was a challenge in the middle of the crisis. However, such challenges must 
be addressed in the most efficient manner, LeCompte suggested: 
29
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 3 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
Determine the key spokespeople, beyond the secretary, for the effort. Do those 
individuals sit within the policy teams? Do they sit within public affairs? Is it a 
combination of the two? But making sure that those resources are dedicated 
somewhere, so that it really can be a robust effort to communicate externally about 
what you’re doing in a really informed way, while still giving the space to the people 
who need to spend the time doing the policy itself. That ’s no easy thing, b ut 
obviously something that needs a ton of attention. 
LeCompte stressed that the responsibility of the public voice/face “cannot be the secretary 
alone” and that the work of explaining the policies cannot be done exclusively on 
background: “You have to get out there and do a chunk of it on the record, too.” 
Dated: December 2021 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2020-02 
30
Lessons Learned: Jenni LeCompte Cardona