--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Chris Ricciardi Lessons Learned: Chris Ricciardi 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Steven H. Kasoff 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. and Kasoff, Steven H. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Chris Ricciardi," Journal of Financial 
Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 435-437. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1274 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/18 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/18

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Chris Ricciardi 
By Matthew A. Lieber and Steven H. Kasoff 
Chris Ricciardi was a CDO pioneer who built the structured products units at CS First Boston 
and Merrill Lynch before moving to the asset management side. Ricciardi began his career 
structuring novel fixed -income securities at Prudential. At CS First Bosto n and Merrill, he 
catapulted each investment bank’s lagging unit into the top of the league tables for CDO 
(collateralized debt obligation) issuance. He was CEO of Cohen & Co. from 2006 to 2011, when 
he left to co -found investment management firm Mead Park  Management. A graduate of the 
University of Richmond with an MBA from the Wharton School of the University of 
Pennsylvania, Ricciardi presently serves as CEO and co -founder of Edly ISA marketplace, an 
income-sharing initiative for financing college tuition. This Lessons Learned summary is based 
on an interview with Ricciardi. 
Field general on the move: Merrill’s CDO unit, initially hampered by funding 
limitations, grew rapidly from 2003 to 2006 under Ricciardi. 
Two things that stand out about Chris Ricciar di’s career are his command of timing and his 
command of teams. Having developed cutting -edge skills in the intricacies of credit 
securitization at Prudential, he moved to CS First Boston to develop its asset -backed 
structuring business—which he did in thr ee years. He then replicated the feat for Merrill 
Lynch, positioning the investment bank to become a structured credit leader. 
Ricciardi described the limitations facing Merrill when he started there. Merrill “didn’t have 
nearly the opportunity because the y didn’t have any good access to funding.” They had to 
line up the pieces like a broker. Ricciardi developed Merrill’s capabilities to underwrite 
CDOs, working with managers to pick a portfolio. Merrill’s trading desk managed the 
warehouse risk while a deal was in ramp-up phase being structured and marketed. 
At the start of 2006, seeking to move beyond CDO underwriting, Ricciardi went to run asset 
management firm Cohen & Co. Ricciardi described his executive management style, which 
he had honed in dramatica lly building out the sell -side units. 1 “I had teams of people who 
were expert in each of these areas,” he explained. “I relied on those people to make the 
decisions about how best to put together the portfolios and to manage them.” These “were 
seasoned, experienced people who knew exactly what to do.” His interaction was “not much 
more extensive than at the investment bank.” Rather, his focus was on “planning and issues 
relating to giving them the right resources, hiring people, technology.” 
 
1 See “The Next Generation of Dealmakers,” Asset Securitization Report, December 4, 2006; and Serena Ng and 
Carrick Mollenkamp, “Pioneer Helped Merrill Move into CDOs,” Wall Street Journal, October 25, 2007. 
435

--- Page 4 ---
Ricciardi downplayed the differences in perspective in moving to the buy side. Building up 
Cohen & Co.’s CDO management business, Ricciardi noted that he now had one client as 
opposed to 40 but that the move did not bring eye-opening changes. 
An appealing innovation: CD Os offered investors a long -term leveraged exposure to 
an illiquid asset class. 
Asked why the different tranches of the CDO appealed to different kinds of investors, 
Ricciardi shared a high-level view on what he called the crucial reason for CDOs. 
The reason that CDOs exist is that they’re attempting to provide leverage on an asset 
class without the risks of using short -term borrowing. They are seeking long -term 
leverage on an asset class. 
The leverage afforded by a CDO was different from the short -term lev erage using repo 
(repurchase agreement) funds or posting margin: long-term leverage. 
Instead, you can use a CDO structure and lock in your leverage. That’s what’s in it for 
the equity guys of every CDO. They want to get a long -leveraged exposure without 
short-term refinancing risk. 
In 2006–07, issuance of subprime CDO derivatives was peaking as short-selling volumes shot 
up. But it was hard for market participants to identify large trends and what was behind the 
short selling, Ricciardi explained. 
In the mi ddle of it, actually, it wasn’t that clear that there’s a growing interest in 
shorting them. Obviously, for the derivative to exist, someone has entered into the 
short side of the trade. But in derivatives, it’s much more common [that it’s] someone 
hedging than someone shorting. Because it was not the greatest way to short 
something. It’s a really messy way to short something. Because the transaction costs 
are so high, it wouldn’t generally make sense unless there’s a very big payoff. 
Ricciardi criticized t he media coverage of short -driven CDO deals such as Magnetar’s 
correlation trade, as well as the emphasis on subprime CDO securitization in much of the 
public discussion of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). The volume of shorts exerted a force 
as a short-term disruption of financial markets, he said, but they were not the cause of the 
financial crisis. Similarly, he did not find fault with the rating agencies for getting home price 
levels wrong when mortgage lenders and appraisals had been inflating values . There was 
excessive home price appreciation in 2007, but no one knew by how much or for how long. 
It was far from inevitable that home prices would correct within just two years, he noted. 
The “funding mismatch” factor: long-term risk was in the wrong hands. 
In Ricciardi’s analysis, the main cause of the financial crisis was what he called the “funding 
mismatch” in large institutions taking long-term credit risk. 
436
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
There’s over -leverage in the institutions that were taking this risk. They were 
basically buying long-term assets and funding them with very short-term liabilities. 
Ricciardi saw the funding mismatch as a recurring cause of US financial crises, historically. 
In the subprime securitization case, the investment banks taking long -term exposure to 
subprime CDOs were reliant on repo funding and unprecedented levels of leverage. They 
were “putting together a long-term transaction saying, ‘over the life of this transaction or 10 
years . . .’ But they didn’t have a way to fund it through the natural life.” The funding mismatch 
made the large investment banks unable to survive the housing market shock. 
It was not that the fundamentals of the assets were that far off, Ricciardi said. Peak-to-trough, 
home prices dropped 25%, an amount that in the equity markets would mean a bear market 
but not a systemic collapse. The home price index did recover fully, Ricciardi noted, and has 
since added another 25% gain. But in 2007, the risk had become “concentrated in the hands 
of some investment banks, in particular, that  were super high over -leveraged.” The result: 
“They can’t handle the down decline. It’s not the right place for that risk.” 
The size of the total issuance of subprime CDOs did not cause the GFC . . . Rather, highly 
leveraged positions of a handful of megafirms forced all investors to unload assets for 
cash—at the market nadir—all at once. 
Ricciardi held that the amount of asset -backed securities (ABS) and mezzanine CDO  debt 
issued was “rather small,” too small to have caused the financial crisis. On reflection, he noted 
that the CDO write-downs “did seem to have a somewhat outsized impact on some financial 
institutions” and wondered openly how they “could have caused such disruption.” 
In the time leading up to the GFC, Ricciardi said, there were basically no rules preventing the 
creation of unlimited amounts of shorts for ABS. And, in fact, it seemed like many multiples 
more shorts were created relative to the existing cash bonds. 
If the owners of the assets could just hold on for the long term —as the assets were 
designed to be held —then the values would have recovered as house prices 
eventually recovered and the major losses could have been avoided. 
Instead, the highly leveraged position of the investors with the greatest CDO exposure —
banks such as Merrill Lynch, Citigroup, and UBS —forced them to unload the assets at the 
worst time and take substantial write-downs, revelations of which spurred a credit crunch. 
Limiting some derivative exposures makes sense as a market-stabilizing policy. 
From a policy standpoint, Ricciardi concluded, it makes sense to examine limiting the volume 
of shorts that can be created by derivatives to the value of the assets they reference. Such a 
rule, had it existed in 2007, might well have led to a different outcome 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: April 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021-01 
437
Lessons Learned: Chris Ricciardi Lieber and Kasoff