--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 2 
2022 
New York Clearing House Association: Overview New York Clearing House Association: Overview 
Sean Fulmer 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Fulmer, Sean (2022) "New York Clearing House Association: Overview," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : 
Iss. 2, 694-707. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1321 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/32 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss2/32

--- Page 3 ---
New York Clearing House Association: Overview1 
Sean Fulmer2, 3 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
June 15, 2022 
Abstract 
Between the creation of nationally chartered banks in 1863 and the launch of the Federal 
Reserve System in 1914, an organization of most New York City banks—originally formed to 
simplify settling clearing balances —joined together during banking panics to reallocate 
liquidity and restore market confidence. In the absence of a central bank, t his organization, 
the New York Clearing House Association (NYCH), issued clearinghouse loan certificates 
(CLCs) that association members could use as temporary cash substitutes for settling 
clearing balances  between banks . CLCs allowed borrowing banks to maintain their cas h 
reserves without costly asset liquidations. The NYCH used CLCs in six crises across this 
period: 1873, 1884, 1890, 1893, 1907, and 1914. Other major cities had comparable 
organizations that often took similar measures during crises. This document serves as an 
overview to the NYCH structure, while the six cases deal with the individual crises and 
responses. 
Keywords: clearinghouse loan certificates, National Banking Era, New York Clearing House 
Association, private lender of last resort   
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering broad -based emergency lending  programs. Cases are available from the Journal of 
Financial Crises at   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
3 Benjamin Hoffner contributed research to this overview. 
694

--- Page 4 ---
Overview 
In the latter half of the 19 th century, clearinghouses functioned as an integral part of the 
infrastructure of the financial system. They provide d a centralized location at which banks 
in American cities could settle their accounts and make or receive payment for daily balances 
between one another, without the additional cost of sending clerks to each individual bank. 
In structure, clearinghouses were a single organization, compris ing many private member 
banks (Gorton and Tallman 2018). 
New York City, even more than today,  functioned as a central financial hub for the United 
States. For instance, by 1873, s even banks in the city account ed for more than 70% of the 
nation’s bank deposits (Gorton and Tallman 2016; Sprague 1910). In 1853, 52 New York City 
banks (including all but a half-dozen small institutions) formed the New York Clearing House 
Association (NYCH). The guiding purpose for creating the NYCH was to make the banking 
payments system more efficient. However, banking pa nics led the NYCH to expand beyond 
this simple administrative role. 
At the time, the United States had no central bank. The Federal Reserve System would not be 
created until 1913 and was not operational until late 1914. In its place, the NYCH stepped in 
during banking panics to provide liquidity to its members, and thus the financial system 
indirectly, acting as a private lender of last resort (Gorton and Tallman 2018). This assumed 
role in the absence of a central bank resembled the private-lender-of-last-resort function the 
Bank of England performed in the 19th century (Fulmer 2022a; Fulmer 2022b). Comparable 
organizations in cities across the United States took similar measures. 
During the National Banking Era (1863–1913), banking panics typically intensified after the 
widespread diffusion of information regarding failed businesses, which caused depositors to 
worry about the backing of their deposits (Gorton and Tallman 2018). Banks in this era 
frequently turned to an  illegal, but rarely penalized, measure to protect themselves from 
runs: suspension of convertibility. Banks would refuse to honor their contracts with demand 
depositors by not exchanging bank debt for cash on demand. Although individual banks 
repeatedly did this, the NYCH never announced a universal suspension (Gorton and Tallman 
2018, 39). 
If the NYCH had not reallocated liquidity across its membership, banks facing runs on their 
deposits would have been forced to liquidate assets to cover clearing obliga tions and 
withdrawal requests. Those liquidations likely would have fallen heavily on call loans, which 
were short -term loans to brokers collateralized by stocks or bonds, similar to today’s 
repurchase agreements (repos). The call loan market functioned as  the most significant 
liquidity provider for the stock market at the time  (Anderson, Hachem, and Zhang 2021) . 
Therefore, a sudden increase in member banks liquidating call loan assets would have had 
serious consequences for the overall volatility of the financial system. Additionally, in times 
of crisis, liquidation of these assets could have resulted in significant losses, if the stock 
market even remained open  (Anderson, Hachem, and Zhang 2021) . See Figures 1 and 2 for 
depictions of NYCH reserve ratios and net deposits during crises as a demonstration of 
695
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
funding pressures on banks in these periods. The crisis of 1914 is not included as the data 
source used in these graphics was published in 1910. 
Figure 1: NYCH Reserve Ratios during Crises (%) 
 
Sources: Author’s creation (Andrew 1910). 
696
New York Clearing House Association Fulmer

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 2: Weekly Net Deposits of NYCH Banks  during Crises, Relative to Annual 
Average 
 
Sources: Author’s creation (Andrew 1910). 
 
Once the NYCH determined a panic was occurring, it typically utilized several policy tools: 
(1) anonymous temporary lending via clearinghouse loan certificates  (CLCs), (2) 
suppression of balance sheet reporting requirements for individual banks, (3) specia l 
examinations of problem banks similar to modern stress tests, (4) banks’ suspension of 
payments, and  (5) depositor bailouts of member banks (Gorton and Tallman 2018) . 
Although the first policy tool is the focus of the Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity case series, 
the other tools are important measures that intersect with and complement emergency 
lending. Gorton and Tallman (2018) provide a detailed discussion of the other clearinghouse 
tools. Additionally, the NYCH sometimes issued certified checks “payable through the 
Clearing House” as a form of quasi-currency to expand banks’ reserves (Timberlake 1984). 
The NYCH’s interventions in crises also coexisted with separate actions of private banks and 
the US Treasury designed to address the liquidity constraints. In at least two of the six crises, 
private bankers joined together to form loan syndicates, which lent to distressed NYCH 
member banks (Wicker 2000, 45, 90). In the majority of the banking crises, the Treasury also 
provided liquidity through large bond redemptions and deposit placements at member 
banks (Cannon 1910; Sprague 1910; Wicker 2000, 44). 
697
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
Administration 
CLCs were  collateralized loans extended to NYCH member banks and us ed solely for the 
purpose of temporarily settling payments with other members (Gorton and Tallman 2016). 
During banking crises, the NYCH’s governing body (the Clearing House Committee) creat ed 
the Clearing House Loan Committee, a temporary administration a ctivated in times of 
distress to facilitate CLC issuance. The decision to issue CLCs, and the volume the association 
would issue, required the approval of 75% of NYCH members (Cannon 1910; Sprague 1910). 
The Loan Committee issue d CLCs, which were the liabilities of the individual borrowing 
banks, but their repayment was guaranteed by the joint membership. 
Member banks deposited collateral at the NYCH, subject to at least a 25% haircut, and 
received CLCs, which could be used only as temporary substitutes for legal tender when 
settling balances between member banks  (Gorton and Tallman 2016) . Instead of a single 
loan between two banks, CLCs functioned as a transferrable liability  (Moen and Tallman 
2013). Member banks could not refuse CLCs as a substitute for cash reserves in the 
settlement of daily balances ; doing so would have resulted in their being  expelled from the 
association (Moen and Tallman 2013) . By receiving and using CLCs to settle their daily 
balances, borrowing members could continue their lending to the call loan market. While not 
directly expanding the supply of cash, the issuance of CLCs allowed the member banks of the 
NYCH greater freedom to utilize their supplies of cash (Moen and Tallman 2013). 
All members in the NYCH guaranteed payment of the CLCs or risked expulsion  (Gorton and 
Tallman 2016). Membership in the NYCH was integral for many member banks’ operations 
at the time, so they would not risk this possibility. If , upon loan termination, the borrowing 
bank could n ot repay, the NYCH would charge all member banks relative to their share of 
capital to the entire membership. This shared loss responsibility further enforced the 
transferability of CLCs. The bank that accepted the CLCs received interest from the 
borrowing bank at rates close to the market rates for commercial paper, although the cost to 
borrowing banks was higher because of the 25% haircut (Gorton and Tallman 2016). 
The NYCH utilized an additional tool  before the National Banking Era, and in 1873 for the 
last time: the pooling of member banks’ reserves into one collective pool (Anderson, Hachem, 
and Zhang 2021). Reserve pooling went beyond joint guarantees of repayment to virtually 
transform the members of the NYCH into a single institution, a proto -central bank. Under 
this arrangement, the NYCH could shift reserves among member banks, depending on the 
stability of individual banks. After 1873, t he NYCH membership preferred issuing CLCs to 
reserve pooling. R eserve pooling offered no clear incentives to participating banks, while 
accepting CLCs guaranteed they would receive interest (Moen and Tallman 2013). Moreover, 
quantitative research by Anderson, Hachem, and Zhang (2021) shows that CLCs achieved the 
same result as reserve pooling, thus making reserve pooling a costly and redundant option. 
Collateral 
Members applying for CLCs had to present collateral to the Loan Committee. The range of 
eligible collateral generally consisted of “bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities” 
698
New York Clearing House Association Fulmer

--- Page 8 ---
(OCC 1907). In a sense, the CLC system resembled a modern triparty repurchase agreement, 
in which the NYCH managed the deposited collateral assets (Moen and Tallman 2013). 
However, CLC transactions did not include the transfer of ownership of the underlying 
collateral. Member banks mostly used commercial paper and commercial loans as collateral 
for CLCs, subject to the minimum 25% haircut, although they had some discretion in 
enforcing this haircut. Member banks could post high-quality US government bonds or gold 
certificates as collateral at par value without a haircut (OCC 1873). The NYCH could request 
additional collateral from borrowing banks if the initial collate ral lost value or matured 
(Gorton and Tallman 2016). 
If the borrower could not repay the CLCs, the NYCH had full recourse to the collateral and 
could liquidate it to recoup payment. This happened occasionally during the National 
Banking Era. In 1884, the Loan Committee held the collateral of a failed borrowing bank for 
more than a year as it waited for market prices to stabilize and ensure a liquidation  at a 
higher value (Moen and Tallman 2013). 
Legality 
 Over the years, the legality of the NYCH’s and other clearinghouses’ issuance of CLCs during 
panics has been controversial (Timberlake 1984). Regulators did not weigh in on  the topic, 
although they also saw CLC issuance as essential to ending banking panics. The only 
contemporary court case we located supports the legality of CLC issuance. 
According to the National Bank Act of 1865, any currency not issued by a nationally 
chartered bank was subject to a 10% tax, priced extremely high to end the issuance of notes 
by state-chartered banks and private banks (US Congress 1865). CLCs effectively functioned 
as substitutes for legal tender and could have been considered illegal  under that law . 
However, contemporary sources and later scholars tend to agree that CLCs used entirely for 
interbank transactions—such as those issued in 1873, 1884, and 1890 —did not break th e 
law because they did not circulate as currency. The National Bank Act of 1864  sanctioned 
clearinghouse certificates that circulated only between banks: “clearing-house certificates, 
representing specie or lawful money specifically deposited for the purpose of any clearing -
house association, shall be deemed to be lawful money” (US Congress 1864). A former NYCH 
chairman, James Cannon, wrote in 1910 that the term “clearing -house certificates” used in 
the act could refer both to the certificates that clearinghouses issued in normal times, which 
were backed by specie or legal tender, and to clearinghouse loan certificates that they issued 
in crises, which were backed by securities (Cannon 1910). He conceded there was a “popular 
misconception” that CLCs violated the act  but argued in response that only a subset of 
clearinghouses outside New York created CLCs that circulated as money  (Cannon 1910). 
Along those lines, Timberlake cites severa l authors who in later decades argue that those 
small-denomination CLCs issued outside New York were clearly illegal (Timberlake 1984). 
In 1895, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruled on the legitimacy of the Philadelphia 
Clearing House Association and the loan certificates it issued during the Panic of 1890, which 
were similar to the CLCs issued by the NYCH. The case seemed to support the legality of CLCs 
699
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
generally (Philler et al. v. Patterson 1895, 482). According to the opinion by Justice Henry W. 
Williams in Philler et al. v. Patterson: 
We are unable therefore to see in what respect these banks have violated the statutes of 
the United States relating to national banks or have transcended the limits which these 
statutes have drawn about the business of banking. . . This same method or one identical 
in general outline has been adopted by the banks in every great city in the United States 
and by many in other lands; and as far as I am aware, it has nowhere been held that the 
method is illegal. (Philler et al. v. Patterson 1895, 482) 
Whether CLCs violated note issuance laws, banking regulators offered tacit approval of their 
use by not prosecuting or taxing such operations. Moreover, authorities recognized the value 
of CLCs in restoring banking stability during a time in which clear legal alternatives did not 
exist (Andrew 1908). 
Rate 
Throughout the National Banking Era, borrowing banks faced an interest rate of 6%–7% on 
CLCs, payable to the accepting bank (Gorton and Tallman 2016). As noted, this interest rate 
essentially matched the rates on commercial paper ; however, the haircut applied to CLC 
collateral in total made CLCs more costly. Therefore, although subject to interest  distinctly 
above market rates during noncrisis times, in times of stress in markets, CLCs became a 
viable option and served as an attractive source of a temporary substitute for cash. Further, 
normalizing market conditions quickly incentivize d borrowing banks to retire their CLC 
holdings (Gorton and Tallman 2016) . See Figure 3 for a depiction of how market rates 
compared with the rate set by the NYCH on CLCs in 1914. 
  
700
New York Clearing House Association Fulmer

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 3: Market Rates during the Crisis of 1914 
 
Note: Dotted line at 6% represents the interest rate on CLCs. The grey box represents the period during which 
the NYCH issued CLCs. 
Sources: Author’s creation (OCC 1914, 51; OCC 1915, 106). 
Usage 
See Figures 4 and 5 for an overview of CLC issuance during the panics covered in this era. As 
Figure 5 shows, the Panic of 1873 saw the highest usage of CLCs as a percent of average NYCH 
net deposits, which dovetails with Figures 1 and 2 that show the significant drops in reserves 
and deposits during that crisis. The relatively lower usage of CLCs in 1914 compared to most 
earlier crises was in part a result of a novel government intervention, which Fulmer (2022c) 
covers in a separate case study. Briefly, in 1914, the Treasury Department used its authority 
under the Aldrich -Vreeland Act of 1908 to issue emergency currency for the first and only 
time (Jacobson and Tallman 2015). Its emergency currency worked in conjunction with CLCs 
as a substitute for cash, functioning like national bank notes but backed by securities other 
than United States bonds. Banks could use emergency currency notes to satisfy depositor 
withdrawals, unlike CLCs, but could not count them as legal reserves. 
701
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 4: NYCH Peak Outstanding CLC Issuance (USD Millions) 
 
Sources: Author’s creation (Andrew 1910). 
Figure 5: NYCH Peak Outstanding CLC Issuance, as a Percent of Average Net NYCH 
Deposits 
 
Sources: Author’s creation (Andrew 1910). 
Imperfections 
As a private organization, the NYCH could not fully act as a lender of last resort. It could take 
care of individual banks in need of liquidity, by requiring other member banks to step up and 
702
New York Clearing House Association Fulmer

--- Page 12 ---
assist their fellow members  (Moen and Tallman 2013 ). However, it could not proactively 
inject liquidity into the financial system beyond the needs of borrowing banks—for example, 
it could not compel banks to borrow by issuing l oan certificates . According to Moen and 
Tallman (2013), “ [T]he severity of the panics suggested that the aggregate liquidity 
provision through clearing house loan certificates was insufficient. ” They suggest that a 
central bank  might have supplied a greater amount of liquidity during the panics of the 
National Banking Era. Although use of CLCs freed up member’s cash to be deployed against 
market accounts, their use did not directly provide liquidity to the market, where the crisis 
typically began. The NYCH was focused on fixing clearing imbalances between members and 
circulated CLCs only amongst member banks. This relatively narrow focus suggests a flaw of 
private lenders of last resort. A central bank might have focused on overall market liquidity 
needs. 
Furthermore, the NYCH’s bank-based membership may have made the associat ion less 
effective over time, as nonbank financial institutions grew in both size and systemic 
importance. For example, trust companies, which were not members of the NYCH, drove the 
instability seen in the Panic of 1907. The NYCH could not address these systemic risks 
directly through CLCs because the certificates  could not circulate outside the membership. 
This restriction reveals another significant flaw in private lender -of-last-resort operations; 
the assistance cannot typically expand beyond the reache s of the membership  (Moen and 
Tallman 2000). 
The NYCH was also constrained by geography, as the Panic of 1893 demonstrated. Failures 
in the railroad industry led to bank runs in the interior of the United States, not initially 
affecting New York City or th e NYCH (Wicker 2000, 52 –55). This crisis eventually affect ed 
New York City banks and their reserve balances (Sprague 1910). As a result, the NYCH issued 
CLCs to prevent widespread bank runs from sweeping the city (OCC 1893). But the NYCH’s 
authorization of CLCs could not alleviate the stress on non –New York City banks due to the 
membership aspect of the private lender -of-last-resort structure. In New York City, banks’ 
total lending during the crisis marginally increased compared to pr e-crisis levels, while in 
Chicago, where no CLCs were issued, loans dropped 15% (Noyes 1894). This divergence 
reflects Chicago lenders’ need to liquidate assets such as loans to alleviate the panic-induced 
stress on the banking community, while in New York  City, CLCs significantly decreased the 
demand for such costly measures (Noyes 1894). 
  
703
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
References and Key Program Documents 
Documents cited in the text are introduced with a parenthetical author -date citation. 
Documents that are relevant to this case but have not been cited in text do not include this 
parenthetical reference. 
Program Summaries 
(Wicker 2000) Wicker, Elmus. 2000. Banking Panics of the Gilded Age. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
A study of the banking panics during the National Banking Era, with specific focus on bank 
closures and causes. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/banking-panics-gilded-age 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(Philler et al. v. Patterson 1895) Philler et al. v. Patterson 1895. Pennsylvania State Reports 
Vol. 168. New York and Albany: Banks & Brothers, Law Publishers. 
State reports containing cases decided by the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, including 
Philler et al v Patterson. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/pennsylvania-state-reports-vol-168 
(US Congress 1864) US Congress. 1864. An Act to Provide a National Currency, Secured by a 
Pledge of United States Bonds, and to Provide for the Circulation and Redemption Thereof 
(National Bank Act). 13 Stat. 99. 1st session, Congress 38–106. 
Law creating the system of national banks and defining (broadly) lawful money and the 
clearinghouses’ role in managing both. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/national-bank-act 
(US Congress 1865) US Congress. 1865. An Act to Amend an Act Entitled “An Act to Provide 
Internal Revenue to Support the Government, to Pay Interest on the Public Debt, and for Other 
Purposes,” Approved June Thirtieth, Eighteen Hundred and Sixty-Four. 13 Stat. 484 § 6. 2nd 
session, Congress 38–78. 
Law taxing circulating private notes at 10%. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20293 
Reports/Assessments 
(Andrew 1910) Andrew, A. Piatt. 1910. “Statistics for the United States 1867-1909.” 
National Monetary Commission. 
Article containing summary statistics for the banking sector in New York City used in the 
context box. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20294 
(OCC 1873) Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). 1873. Eleventh Annual Report 
of the Comptroller of the Currency for the Year 1873. November 28, 1873. 
704
New York Clearing House Association Fulmer

--- Page 14 ---
Report from the OCC on the Panic of 1873 and the response by the NYCH. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1873 
(OCC 1893) Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). 1893. Annual Report of the 
Comptroller of the Currency. December 4, 1893. 
1893 OCC annual report. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1893 
(OCC 1907) Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). 1907. Annual Report of the 
Comptroller of the Currency. December 2, 1907. 
Report by the OCC containing information on the Panic of 1907, as well as data on the 
previous NYCH interventions. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1907 
(OCC 1914) Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). 1914. Annual Report of the 
Comptroller of the Currency. December 7, 1914. 
Annual report of the OCC, which details CLCs and emergency currency. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1914 
(OCC 1915) Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). 1915. Annual Report of the 
Comptroller of the Currency. December 6, 1915. 
Annual report of the OCC, which details CLCs and emergency currency. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1915 
Key Academic Papers 
(Anderson, Hachem, and Zhang 2021) Anderson, Haelim, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and 
Simpson Zhang. 2021. “Reallocating Liquidity to Resolve a Crisis: Evidence from the Panic 
of 1873.” Working Paper 28870. Working Paper Series. National Bureau of Economic 
Research. 
Article that uses a novel dataset of archival records to analyze the NYCH’s response to the 
Panic of 1873. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/reallocating-liquidity-resolve-crisis-
evidence-panic-1873 
(Andrew 1908) Andrew, A. Piatt. 1908. “Substitutes for Cash in the Panic of 1907.” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 22, no. 4: 497–516. 
Article describing CLC issuance and payment limitations around the US. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20012 
(Cannon 1910) Cannon, James Graham. 1910. “Clearing House Methods and Practices.” 61st 
Senate Doc. 491. Publications of the National Monetary Commission. Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office. 
Report for the National Monetary Commission by an individual connected to the 
clearinghouses that provides detail on their operations and structure. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/clearing-house-methods-and-practices 
705
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
(Fulmer 2022a) Fulmer, Sean. 2022a. “United Kingdom: Bank of England Lending during 
the Panic of 1825.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. 
Case study on the Bank of England’s private lender-of-last-resort activities during the Panic of 
1825. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/51 
(Fulmer 2022b) Fulmer, Sean. 2022b. “United Kingdom: Bank of England Lending during 
the Panic of 1866.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. 
Case study on the Bank of England’s private lender-of-last-resort activities during the Panic of 
1866. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/52 
(Fulmer 2022c) Fulmer, Sean. 2022c. “United States: Aldrich-Vreeland Emergency 
Currency during the Crisis of 1914.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. 
Case study on the Treasury Department’s role in issuing emergency currency during the Crisis 
of 1914. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/53 
(Gorton and Tallman 2016) Gorton, Gary, and Ellis W. Tallman. 2016. “How Did Pre-Fed 
Banking Panics End?” NBER Working Paper. 
Working paper on the actions committed by the NYCH in response to banking panics in the 
absence of a central bank. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/how-did-pre-fed-banking-panics-end 
(Gorton and Tallman 2018) Gorton, Gary, and Ellis Tallman. 2018. Fighting Financial Crises: 
Learning from the Past. Fighting Financial Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Book documenting how the New York Clearing House Association responded to several 
banking panics in the National Banking Era. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/fighting-financial-crises-learning-past 
(Jacobson and Tallman 2015) Jacobson, Margaret, and Ellis W. Tallman. 2015. “Liquidity 
Provision during the Crisis of 1914: Private and Public Sources.” Journal of Financial 
Stability 17: 22–34. 
Article that compares the structure and usage of CLCs and emergency currency during the 
Crisis of 1914. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/liquidity-provision-during-crisis-1914-private-and-
public-sources 
(Moen and Tallman 2000) Moen, Jon R., and Ellis W. Tallman. 2000. “Clearinghouse 
Membership and Deposit Contraction during the Panic of 1907.” Journal of Economic 
History 60, no. 1: 145–63. 
Article providing information on NYCH membership during the panic of 1907. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20252 
(Moen and Tallman 2013) Moen, Jon R., and Ellis W. Tallman. 2013. “Close but Not a Central 
Bank: The New York Clearing House and Issues of Clearing House Loan Certificates.” 
Working Paper 1308. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. 
706
New York Clearing House Association Fulmer

--- Page 16 ---
Paper that closely examines the issuance of CLCs by the NYCH during the National Banking 
Era. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/close-not-central-bank-new-york-clearing-
house-and-issues-clearing-house-loan 
(Noyes 1894) Noyes, Alexander D. 1894. “The Banks and the Panic of 1893.” Political 
Science Quarterly 9, no. 1: 12–30. 
Article surveying the NY banks and the 1893 crisis. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20200 
(Sprague 1910) Sprague, Oliver Mitchell Wentworth. 1910. History of Crises under the 
National Banking System. Publications of the National Monetary Commission, 61st 
Congress, 2nd Session, Senate Doc. No. 538. Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Office. 
Definitive account of the NYCH crises, leading to the creation of the Federal Reserve. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/history-crises-under-national-banking-
system 
(Timberlake 1984) Timberlake, Richard H. 1984. “The Central Banking Role of 
Clearinghouse Associations.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 16, no. 1: 1–15. 
Journal article on the role of the NYCH as a private lender of last resort without a central 
bank in existence. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/central-banking-role-clearinghouse-
associations 
 
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
707
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2