--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
The Federal Reserve System: Diversity and Governance The Federal Reserve System: Diversity and Governance 
Kaleb Nygaard 
University of Pennsylvania 
Peter Conti-Brown 
Wharton Initiative on Financial Policy and Regulation, Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Nygaard, Kaleb and Conti-Brown, Peter (2022) "The Federal Reserve System: Diversity and Governance," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 4, 1-46. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1437 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/1 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote 
We are grateful to Aaron Klein for comments on an early draft. We are also grateful for the tremendous 
work of the following research assistants: Heather Nygaard, Matt Joachim, Heather No, Vishesh Patel, 
Richard Pletan, Jonathan Roth, and Lola Thrower. An earlier, shorter version of this paper appeared under 
the title “Diversity within the Federal Reserve System,” published by the Brookings Institution on April 13, 
2021. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol4/iss4/1

--- Page 3 ---
The Federal Reserve System:  
Diversity and Governance1 
Kaleb Nygaard2 and Peter Conti-Brown3 
Abstract 
A growing chorus has called on the Federal Reserve System to diversify its ranks at all levels 
to reflect better the heterogeneity of the United States. So far , most of these efforts speak to 
the diversity of the Fed’s principals, namely, the members of the Fed’s Board of Governors 
and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks , who together form the Federal Open 
Market Committee. In this study, we look instead at a vital part of Federal Reserve 
governance that has so far not received the same sustained attention: the directors of the 
Federal Reserve Banks, those private citizens responsible for choosing the presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks in the first instance and otherwise providing corporate oversight 
over the Federal Reserve Banks. We find a staggering homogeneity among them, with only 
recent signs of diversification and only then in some parts of those boards. The boards are 
overwhelmingly white, overwhelmingly male, and overwhelmingly drawn from the business 
communities within their districts, with little participation from minorities, women, or 
certain areas of the economy —labor, nonprofits, the academy. We conclude by 
recommending that the Federal Reserve System —the Board of Governors, the Federal 
Reserve Banks, and the member banks that belong to the system and vote for some of these 
directors—make its selection processes more transparent for outside evaluation such that 
progress (or lack thereof) can be better measured and attributed. 
 
Keywords: diversity, Federal Reserve, governance 
 
JEL Classifications: G30, M14
 
1 We are grateful to Aaron Klein for comments on an early draft. We are also grateful for the tremendous work 
of the following research assistants: Heather Nygaard, Matt Joachim, Heather No, Vishesh Patel, Richard Pletan, 
Jonathan Roth, and Lola Thro wer. An earlier, shorter version of this paper appeared under the title “Diversity 
within the Federal Reserve System,” published by the Brookings Institution on April 13, 2021.  
2 Kaleb Nygaard, graduate student, University of Pennsylvania, kalebnygaard@gma il.com. 
3 Peter Conti-Brown, Class of 1965 Associate Professor of Financial Regulation and co -director of the Wharton 
Initiative on Financial Policy and Regulation, Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania , 
petercb@wharton.upenn.edu. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction 
The Federal Reserve System has a diversity problem (Corser 2021; GAO 2021). This has long 
been obvious at the top of the organization, among the members of the Fed’s Board of 
Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks , who together constitute the 
Federal Open Market Committee  (FOMC), the group that decides the nation’s monetary 
policy4 (Klein 2016 ; Saraiva, Matthews, and Merrill  2020). These key economic 
policymakers, among the most important in the nation, are overwhelmingly white and male. 
There have been only three Black members of the Fed’s Board of Governors, only one Black 
Federal Reserve Bank president, and only three nonwhite Federal Reserve Bank presidents 
in the entire system’s history. There is also a sense that these principals are overwhelmingly 
promoted from within, creating a risk for groupthink and intellectual homogeneity ( Conti-
Brown, Listokin, and Parrillo 2021; Klein and Weiss 2015). This homogeneity runs deep 
within the Federal Reserve System, including at the  staff level (Wessel , Sheiner, and Ng 
2019). 
Less attention, however, has been paid to another extraordinarily important part of the 
Federal Reserve System: the directors of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. Since the Fed’s 
inception in 1913, the directors were designed to be private sector gatekeepers for the Fed’s 
extraordinary power, as a compromise between public and private influence over the 
regulation of the nation’s money (Lowenstein 2015) . Congress gave these actors the 
authority to oversee the Federal Reserve Banks in ways similar to other corporate boards of 
directors, with the power to appoint (and remove) the Reserve Bank president and officers, 
define the duties of the Bank leadership,  and write bylaws by which the Reserve Bank 
conducts business. And, as amended, the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 (FRA) makes clear that 
with that power comes the need for great diversity: these directors are to “represent the 
public . . . elected without di scrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, or national 
origin, and with due but not exclusive consideration to the interests of agriculture, 
commerce, industry, services, labor, and consumers.”5 
This provision, added in large part in 1977, is i ntended to rectify historical exclusions on a 
grand scale. This article provides something of a report card on that effort. Using the 106 
publicly available annual reports of the Board of Governors from 1914 through 2019, we 
compiled a database of all indi viduals who have served as Federal Reserve Bank directors. 
Beyond the basic information found in the annual reports, we expanded the biographical 
database to include race, gender, profession, education, age, time spent in position, and 
whether or not the director later held a position on the FOMC. 
 
4 All seven members of the Board of Governors, the president of the Federal Reserve Board of New York, and a 
rotation of four additional Reserve Bank presidents form the FOMC voting membership, though all Reserve 
Bank presidents attend FOMC meetings and participate. 
5 12 USC 302. 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
This biographical database significantly expands, in time horizon and scope of diversity 
measures, three important studies completed in the past decade. First, the Dodd–Frank Wall 
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd–Frank), the financial regulation 
reform legislation passed in response to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC)  of 200 7–2009, 
included a provision requiring the Government Accountability Office  (GAO) to conduct a 
review of the governance  of the Federal Reserve Banks. Its report, published in October 
2011, cover s race, gender, education, and industry of directors between 2006 and 2011. 
Based on the report’s review, the GAO issued several recommendations aimed at “enhancing 
the diversity of  the Reserve Bank boards, strengthening policies for managing conflicts of 
interest, and enhancing transparency related to board governance” (GAO 2011). The second 
study, conducted jointly by Fed Up and the Center for Popular Democracy (CPD), covers race, 
gender, and industry between 2013 and 2019, concluding that “the Fed’s pace of change is 
entirely too slow” (Corser 2019). Finally, a follow-up study by Fed Up and CPD published in 
June 2021 notes that “commendable gains” in diversity ha ve been made for th e directors 
appointed by the Board of Governors but that the directors elected by local banks to 
represent the public “persistently fail on sectoral and racial diversity (Corser 2021). Each of 
these studies have made significant contributions to the public dialogue around diversity at 
the Fed and include recommendations that the Fed broaden recruitment of directors and 
increase transparency of the selection process and governing documents of the directors. 
This article, an expansion of our report published by the Brookings Institution in April 2021, 
expands the timeline of the above -mentioned databases by (1) filling in data back to the 
founding of the Federal Reserve System in 1913 and (2) expanding the scope of diversity 
measures. This allows us to explore  the full breadth and history of diversity in this critical 
leadership role at the Fed. 
The results do not show that the Federal Reserve Bank directors reflect anything close to the 
American people along virtually any dimension. On race, we see that the fi rst nonwhite 
directors were not appointed by the Board of Governors until the 1970s. Even as late as the 
2010s, nonwhite directors represented less than 10% of the total directors in any given year, 
as compared to nearly 40% of the total US population (Cen sus 2020) . Representation of 
female directors tracks a similar pattern, with the first female directors also appointed in the 
1970s, reaching 10% by the late 1990s, and increasing more quickly in the 2010s to 37% in 
2019. During that period, women represen ted 50% to 51% of the total US population and 
38% to 47% of the workforce (BLS n.d.; World Bank n.d.). 
Sectoral representation also suggests important trends that have not been fully understood 
or analyzed. First, directors from manufacturing backgrounds decreased as a share of 
directors overall from approximately 20% in  the 1940s to approximately 5% in the  2010s. 
Second, there is a substantial increase in the portion of directors from the nonbank financial 
sector from approximately 5% in  the 1980s to approximately 10% in the 2010s . These are 
directors who are explicitly meant to represent sectors besides finance. 
Third, and perhaps most surprising, only 5 % of directors have had a PhD in economics —
inarguably an important credential for their main task of evaluating the competence of 
central bankers. In general, economists are arguably overrepresented at the F ed’s senior 
3
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 6 ---
ranks, but at the level of Fed eral Reserve Bank  directors, they are substantially 
underrepresented, potentially so much so that their central governance purpose becomes 
much harder. 
Given these failures of diversity, some have argued that , among other reasons,  the quasi-
private corporate structure of the Federal Reserve Banks should be jettisoned in favor of the 
international standard of a fully public central bank (Haedtler, Levin, and Wilson 2016). We 
do not reach that conclusion. Instead, we argue that the system that currently exists, created 
by Congress in 1913, can be significantly improved by radically increasing the transparency 
around the selection process for Federal Reserve Bank officers and directors (Conti -Brown 
2020; Corser 2019 ; GAO 2011; Nygaard 2020b). More specifically, we urge the Fed —and, 
where necessary, Congress —to develop and disclose a more detailed framework through 
which Federal Reserve Bank directors are selected. This proposal is not simply an argument 
in favor of t ransparency for transparency’s sake but a recognition that diversification of 
candidate pools and appointments requires substantial effort and strategic thinking. This 
transparency will allow outsiders to participate in those efforts and evaluate the results—to 
credit the Fed’s successes and exercise accountability for the failures. 
The article is organized as follows. Section II provides background on the Fed’s governance 
and the changes that Congress and the Fed itself have made over the years to increase  
director diversity. Section III, the bulk of the article, presents and describes the data we have 
collected to describe the path of diversity at the Federal Reserve. In particular, we focus on 
four elements of that diversity from our database: race, gende r, occupation, and education. 
The first two have received most of the attention in recent discussions; the last two much 
less so. Section IV offers a more fully developed program for reform. Section V concludes by 
emphasizing the importance of having an un derstanding of who the directors are. Two 
appendixes present more data on race and gender, disaggregated by Federal Reserve Bank.  
II. The Governance of the Federal Reserve 
The Federal Reserve System is a governance curiosity. The “federal” in its name is something 
of a misnomer. There is no state -national balance in the system, no shared system of 
sovereignty, but instead a balance among Fed regions—12 Federal Reserve Districts that 
were designed at inception largely by Democratic politicians in a somewhat par tisan 
exercise that often bisected specific states—and the Washington, DC–based Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors ( Binder and Spindel 2016 ; Binder and Spindel 2017). The Board was 
initially chaired by the secretary of the Treasury and included other presi dential 
appointments that required Senate confirmation, for political accountability purposes. The 
Reserve Banks, one for each Federal Reserve District, would have a president (earlier styled 
a “ governor”), appointed by its directors (Conti -Brown 2016). Co ngress divided those 
directors into three classes: Class A directors would be “chosen by and be representative of 
the stock -holding banks,” those banks that joined the Federal Reserve System. Class B 
directors would be “actively engaged in their district in commerce, agriculture, or some other 
industrial pursuit,” and would be elected by stock-holding banks in the same manner as Class 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 7 ---
A directors. And, finally, Class C directors would be “designated by the Federal Reserve 
Board,” at least two of whom would be individuals of “tested banking experience” but could 
not be an employee of a stockholder bank (US Congress 1913). 
The purpose of this intricate arrangement was in the spirit of checks and balances: some in 
the original enacting coalition wanted a Federal Reserve Board for political accountability, 
others wanted to ensure private Federal Reserve Banks to ensure that th at accountability 
did not turn the enterprise into a purely partisan one (Kolko 1965; Lowenstein 2015; Wiebe 
1967). In 1935, the Federal Reserve System was reorganized into the modern version with 
a Board of Governors in Washington, DC, and a Federal Open Market Committee that consists 
of both Fed governors and Reserve Bank presidents. The structure of the Reserve Bank 
directors remained the same (Conti-Brown 2016). 
Congress has updated this somewhat byzantine governance framework with respect to Fed 
directors at various important points during the Fed’s century. Two changes are especially 
important. First, in 1977, Congress updated FRA Section 4 to include an antidiscrimination 
provision for each class of directors. These directors were thenceforth to be se lected 
“without discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, sex, or national origin.”6 The Class 
B and C directors were to “represent the public” and were also to be selected “with due but 
not exclusive consideration to the interests of agriculture , commerce, industry, services, 
labor, and consumers.” 7 As in 1913, the banks still elect both Class A and Class B directors 
and the Board of Governors appoints the Class C directors. 
The other major change, one of director responsibility rather than dire ctor selection, came 
in 2010 as part of Dodd –Frank. After 2010, the president and first vice president of the 
Federal Reserve Banks were no longer to be selected by vote of the full board of directors, 
but “shall be appointed by the Class B and Class C dir ectors of the bank [the nonbanker 
directors], with the approval of the Board of Governors.” The role of the Class A directors, 
the bankers, in participating in the presidential search remains uncertain but not legally 
forbidden (Fed Board n.d.2).8 
Beyond these statutory parameters, the other formal law governing the appointments 
process for Federal Reserve directors is about the voting process. There is little formal law 
governing who can be appointed, although the Fed does publish a document outlining the 
“roles and responsibilities of Federal Reserve Directors” that adds some gloss to the statute 
(see Fed Board n.d.1 for the latest version). 
Most importantly, there is no mechanism to ensure diversity along any parameter beyond a 
prohibition against discrimination (with no enforcement or information -gathering 
mechanism) and the relatively weak endorsement of “due but not exclusive consideration” 
for various constituencies beyond banking. 
 
6 12 USC § 302. 
7 12 USC § 302. 
8 12 USC 341, 124 Stat. 2126. 
5
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 8 ---
III. Evaluating the Fed’s Diversity 
In June 2020, during a regular FOMC press conference that coincided with rising protests in 
response to the murder of George Floyd (among other events), Fed Chair Jerome Powell 
confronted the problems of racism and the oppo rtunities for diversity directly. “I speak for 
my colleagues throughout the Federal Reserve System when I say that there is no place at 
the Federal Reserve for racism.” He added: “These principles [of nondiscrimination] guide 
us in all we do, from monetary  policy to our focus on diversity and inclusion in our 
workplace, and to our work to ensure fair access to credit across the country” (Powell  
2020a). 
Powell and his colleagues have continued to emphasize these issues, including within the 
Federal Reserve System itself. Shortly before the following FOMC press conference, a former 
Board staff economist published a blistering public letter that demonstrated poor diversity 
performance in the economics field broadly and at the Fed specifically (Sahm 2020). When 
asked about the letter, Powell further acknowledged, “there’s been a lot of pain and injustice 
and unfair treatment that women have experienced in the workplace —not just among 
economists, but among economists at the Fed  . . . the Fed could have done more a nd should 
have done more” (Powell 2020b). 
Powell isn’t the lone voice from within the Fed calling for the institution to do better. Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco President Mary Daly has spoken movingly and personally 
about the gender discrimination  she has faced as a junior employee of the Federal Reserve 
System (see Daly 2018). Raphael Bostic, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 
the first —and until 2022 , only —Black Fed president, has recently given three speeches 
focusing on the impor tance of diversity at the Fed and in the broader economy (see Bostic 
2020a; Bostic 2020b; Bostic 2021). Scholars have also started focusing more on failures of 
diversity within the financial regulatory community, including important studies published 
by Brookings by Aaron Klein, Chris Brummer, and David Wessel ( Brummer 2020; Klein 
2016; Wessel, Sheiner, and Ng 2019). 
As important as these conversations are, key mechanisms for improving diversity within the 
system remain in the hands of these Reserve Bank directors. To understand better the 
problem that Powell, Daly, Bostic, and many others have identified, we must take a long view 
to outline just how grave the problem is that the Fed is confronting. 
A. Methodology 
Using the 106 publicly available annual reports of the Board of Governors from 1914 through 
2019, we compiled a database of all 2,607 individ uals who have served in unique positions 
as Federal Reserve Bank directors. 9 The information on the annual reports include s only 
 
9 Annual reports are available on FRASER (n.d.). Our database includes 1,957 unique people. For our analysis, 
we used the 2,607 count, which includes each time an individual served in multiple positions on the board of 
directors. For example, if an individu al was first elected a Class B director and was later appointed the board 
chair (a Class C position) by the Board of Governors, we count this person twice. We believe this is a more 
appropriate count because it includes every time a new position on the boa rd of directors was filled. Note too 
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 9 ---
district, city/state, employer, and board leadership position. From board position , we were 
able to garner two pieces of information. 
Beyond the information available on the annual reports, we expanded the biographical 
database to include: race, gender, profession, education, age, time spent in position, and 
whether or not the director later held a position on the FOMC. With help  from exceptional 
research assistants, we reviewed historical materials to catalogue this additional 
biographical information. Our primary sources include: newspaper archives, census records, 
genealogical databases, and corporate profiles. 
We were able to find information on the diversity measures listed above for the following 
proportions of directors in the database: a white/nonwhite race indicator for 97.5% of the 
directors, a male/female gender indicator for 100% of the directors, the sector of 100% of 
the directors, and the terminal degree for 72% of the directors.10 
Categorizing people based on perceived race is a more fraught exercise, as a binary 
white/nonwhite determination oversimplifies reality, particularly within the 
Latino/Hispanic community. 11 To overcome these limitations, we prioritized information 
and sources as follows: (1) self -identification in a primary source, (2) identification in a 
secondary source, (3) national origin/heritage in primary or secondary sources, where, for 
example, all Latino/Hispanic countries from the Western hemisphere counted as nonwhite, 
and (4) subjective determinations based on director photographs. The last and admittedly 
least objective category constituted less than 10% of the nonwhite directors we recorded. 
We do not include political affiliation, another important measure of diversity, in our 
analysis. However, Caitlin Ainsley, a political scientist from the University of Washington, has 
conducted a review of political campaign donations from the Reserve Bank directors 
between 1980 and 2015, cataloguing donations from 71% of the directors. Ainsley’s study 
suggests that along this important dimension , there is substantial heterogeneity among the 
directors, a heterogeneity that is less apparent than in the areas we assess (Ainsley 2020). 
Research by Gabrielle Elul finds that, “relative to the population of campaign contributors, 
Reserve Bank directors make more donations, are more likely to donate to Republicans, and 
are more politically conservative” (Elul 2018).  These results suggest that the challenges to 
diversify the directors, while very real, are not insurmountable: whatever process is 
currently in place yields variety at least along this one dimension, suggesting a path ahead 
along others, too. 
 
that this only includes directors who were in their position at the time the annual report was compiled. 
Therefore, some directors who started and ended their service between the compilation of two annual reports 
are no t included in this analysis. Whitney M. Young, Jr., the first Black director, is one such individual not 
included in the database. See New York Times (1971), reporting on his tragic death. 
10 Defined as the final degree they received, unless they received both a JD and PhD, in which case both are 
catalogued. 
11 For a history of the terms “Latino” and “Hispanic” and their use in the US, see Martinez and Gonzalez (2020).  
7
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 10 ---
B. Race 
Figure 1 represents the history of the Federal Reserve System and records the number of 
nonwhite directors from its founding in 1913 through 2019.12 
Figure 1: Portion of Directors That Are Nonwhite (by Class) 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
We do not observe a trend of inclusion of nonwhite directors until into the 1980s , and even 
then, the inclusion of racially  diverse directors is mostly a function of the Class C directors, 
the nonbankers appointed by the Board of Governors. The Class B directors, nonbankers  
appointed by member banks, began to see greater racial diversification in the 1990s. Most 
worrisome is the lack of diversity among Class A directors, bankers appointed by bankers. 
Not only has this number of nonwhite directors never been large , but it has  also actually 
decreased recently. 
There is an obvious explanation for this failure of Class A racial diversity. The racial 
homogenization is consistent with the known lack of gender and racial diversity in the US 
banking industry more broadly. In February  2020, the US House Financial Services 
Committee published a review of diversity based on a survey of the 44 largest banks in the 
country (House 2020). The report indicates that while diversity in the industry has increased 
at the entry and mid dle levels, executives and other senior leaders remain overwhelmingly 
white. It is thus credible that the Fed’s diversity problem for Class A directors remains closely 
tethered to the diversity problems for banking in general. 
We can observe more differences when we b reak out racial diversity by Federal Reserve 
Bank. Figure 2 represents the first year that each Federal Reserve Bank appointed its first 
 
12 Nygaard first discussed preliminary analysis of racial disparities among the directors of the Federal Reserve 
Banks via Twitter based on an early version of the biographical database (Nygaard 2020a). 
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 11 ---
nonwhite director, beginning in 1972 (Philadelphia and San Francisco) and ending in 1992 
(Kansas City). 
Figure 2: First Year with Nonwhite Director 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Appendix A goes further to break down the inclusion of nonwhite directors by each of the 
Federal Reserve Banks. The numbers are not promising: there are significant periods for 
each of the Federal R eserve Banks when there are not more than one or two nonwhite 
directors at a time. Only Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco have had three or more nonwhite 
directors on any sustained basis. It appears suggestive at least that the 1977 law prohibiting 
discrimination had little effect in changing the racial composition of these boards. 
C. Gender 
The (lack of) gender diversity within the Fed’s boards of directors reflects a similar 
homogenization as we see in racial diversity, as the first female directors are (1) nonbankers 
and (2) appointed in the 1970s, followed in the 1980s by the election of the first few female 
bankers. However, efforts to increase female representation have been far more successful 
than has been the case for improving racial diversity. Female directors represented 37% of 
all directors in 2019, across all classes (though the numbers are still better for nonbankers). 
Figure 3 represents the Fed’s history with female directors across all districts. 
9
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 3: Portion of Directors That Are Female (by Class) 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
To put this in context, the increase in the full US female labor force participation rate can be 
seen in Figure 4. 
Figure 4: Female Labor Force Participation 
 
Source: BLS n.d. 
Figure 5 represents the first year that female directors were appointed, from 1977 (Dallas, 
San Francisco, St. Louis, Atlanta, and Philadelphia) to 1988 (Cleveland). 
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 5: First Year with a Female Director  
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Appendix B provides district -by-district analysis of female director participation. The 
Reserve Bank boards are, in general, not close to gender parity, with the important 
exceptions of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Minneapolis, each of which had five 
female directors in 2019. Some districts remain far from parity; only two of the nine 
directors on each of the Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco boards are female. Here, 
differently from the experience of racial diversity at the boards, our evidence is at least 
consistent with the view that the 1977 law had an impact —perhaps even a major impact—
on the increase in gender diversity. 
Similar to racial diversity, it is the case that finance in general has a problem, especially at 
the senior level, for gender parity. The Fed is not alone in this regard. At the largest 44 
financial institutions, according to the February 2020 US House Financial Services 
Committee report, only 29% of senior executives are female. What is remarkable here is that 
the Class B and C directors are explicitly not expected to be drawn from finance. Even so, for 
the most part, the Fed struggles in this regard and has done so for most of its history. 
D. Sectoral Representation 
We turn now to sectoral representative ness among the directors. Figure 6 illustrates the 
trends over time for the top 10 sectors. 
11
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 6: Top 10 Sectors over Time 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Given that Class A directors are explicitly bankers elected by bankers, it is perhaps 
unsurprising to see their predominance. But a trend since roughly 1980 includes a 
substantial and growing number of nonbanking finance representatives as the third -most 
represented single group, after banking and manufacturing. The influence of finance on the 
Reserve Banks’ governance remains very strong, even among the classes of directors meant 
to represent other interests. 
This overrepresentation of finance might arise from the rise of financialization of the US 
economy during the same period by multiple  factors.13 But it also represents a challenge to 
the idea that the Reserve Bank boards should represent a variety of sectors in the economy. 
The growth of nonbank finance represents a challenge to that conception. 
Missing almost entirely from this equatio n, despite its inclusion in the list of statutory 
considerations, is labor. Figure 7 illustrates the absence of labor participation in Fed 
governance. 
 
13 Financialization has many definitions, and scholars have used different meth ods for measuring it over time. 
For a summary and review, see the introduction to Epstein (2005). 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 7: Portion of Directors with Labor Background 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Figure 8 puts this data differently, outlining labor participation by each Federal Reserve 
Bank. 
13
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 8: Total Number of Directors from Labor 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
It is of course the case that organized labor is not the exclusive representative of working 
women and men, so this lack of union representation may not apprehend the nature of labor 
participation. Indeed, there is a long -term, well -documented secular decline in labor 
representation, especially in the private sector. The Bureau of Labor Statistics has trac ked 
union membership in the US since 1980, and the percent of public sector union membership 
has only dipped from slightly above 35% to slightly below it. The decline in private sector 
union membership, on the other hand, has decreased steadily from nearly 17% in the 1980s 
to 6% in 2020 (see USA Facts 2020 ). But even taking the general private sector decline in 
union membership into consideration, it is remarkable how minimal labor participation is in 
Federal Reserve governance, with few exceptions.14 
E. Education 
Given the importance of personnel selection—for the president of the Federal Reserve Banks 
in particular but other Reserve Bank employees too —we analyzed educational attainment 
for the directors. Although such attainment is not a  prerequisite for evaluating personnel 
quality that requires advanced education, it is relevant to that assessment. Figure 9 tracks 
terminal degrees over time. 
 
14 Nygaard has advocated for the US president and Senate to pay much more attention to labor representation 
at the Board of Governors (Nygaard 2020b). We both endorse this conclusion. 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 9: Terminal Degree (All Districts, Count)  
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Note important gaps in our data—the further back we go, the less concrete the information. 
(Also, note that we use the JD degree as a substitute for the LLB, which did not become 
standard until the late 1960s.) 
Notable here is the relative lack of participation on the boar ds of directors from academic 
economists, a reversal of a trend for the heads of the Reserve Banks themselves, where a 
majority of newly appointed Reserve Bank presidents since the 1980s have had a PhD, 80% 
in economics.15 The Reserve Bank boards of directors therefore may be the one place where 
economists are underrepresented relative to their importance to Fed governance. 
This lack of representation for economists poses something of a governance quandary for 
the Reserve Banks and their directors. If the directors’ primary responsibility is to select the 
presidents of their banks, and the trend for central bankers is increas ingly toward 
sophistication in graduate level economics, is it plausible for these directors —the 
overwhelming majority of whom do not have this training —to assess the merits of these 
candidates? We pos it the question but cannot answer it in this report. Su ffice it to say that 
this mismatch raises more questions than this one about the suitability of the present 
governance arrangements. 
  
 
15 Based on another biographical created by Nygaard based off FOMC participant biographies on the Fed’s 
history website (Nygaard 2021). 
15
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 10 describes the area of academic focus for the directors. 
Figure 10: Terminal Degree Major/Field (All Districts, Count) 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
These trends are consistent with the professionalization of private and public bureaucracy 
generally over the 20 th century. Also, given the deep pockets of uncertainty, not much can 
be drawn about these differences on the basis of this data alone. They do invite further 
research, however, especially given, again, the relative dearth of economics as a field of study 
for these directors. 
IV. Implications and Reform 
Janet Yellen, current Treasury secretary and former Fed chair, explained why the lack of 
diversity in economics generally matters at a September 2019 Brookings conference. She 
highlights the basic fairness of increasing diversity, the better performance of diverse teams, 
and the “wasted talent” if institutions don’t increase diversity ( Yellen 2019). Research by a 
Richmond Fed economist published in 2017 suggests that it would take more than 30 years 
to reach gender parity for Reserve Bank directors at the current pace ( Jarque and Davis 
2019). Given the relative homogeneity across history of the Reserve Bank directors, we 
suggest four conclusions that are important to consider as the Fed seeks to solve this 
problem at a faster pace than it has done to date. 
First, the road ahead for diversifying along race and gender for the Reserve Bank directors 
will be challenging if history is a guide. To be fair, this is not a problem for the Federal 
Reserve alone, and nothing in this report supports that conclusion. We do not know how well 
or poorly other central banks, other government bureaucracies, or other private institutions 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 19 ---
have done on these same parameters.16 But if the goal is even representation—meaning that 
the corps of Fed directors maps even passingly the population that these directors are meant 
to represent—then there is a long way to go. That said, recent progress for Class C directors 
suggests that this is a problem well within the Fed’s expertise to resolv e. As of 2021, 
minorities represented 56% of Class C directors, up from 22% in 2015. 
Second, it is very difficult to believe that “due . . . consideration” has been given to labor in 
the selection of Class B and C directors, despite that statutory instruct ion. The participation 
of individuals with backgrounds in labor is a very small proportion of the entire corps of 
directors, and even then, it is a recent phenomenon focused in some districts but not others. 
This failure is even more striking given the Fed ’s 2020 prioritization of its full employment 
mandate over its inflation mandate.17 
Third, given the nature of the task for Reserve Bank directors—that is, the selection of central 
bankers who will make monetary policy —it is stark how little educational ba ckground in 
economics we observe, even in recent years where our data is more complete. Although 
economists are potentially overrepresented in the highest reaches of the Fed (and in other 
central banks), they appear significantly underrepresented as partic ipants in Fed 
governance. 
Fourth, director diversity is important for its own sake but also for the ways that that 
diversity will influence the roles that these directors play in shaping the agendas of the 
Reserve Banks, the Federal Open Market Committee, the general discourse around central 
banking in the United States and beyond, and even supervisory priorities. Research by 
Feinstein, Conti-Brown, and Nygaard finds that higher levels of diversity on Reserve Bank 
boards correlate with higher C ommunity Reinvestment Act scores, a measure of lending to 
minority communities (2022) . There are curiosities in the data, to be sure: The Federal 
Reserve Bank of Cleveland is the first Reserve Bank with a female president, the last with a 
female director. Diversity at the level of the directors will not solve, without more initiatives, 
diversity issues elsewhere in the system. But it will be an important start, providing lessons 
learned that will inform the processes throughout the system. 
The Fed has already made publi c commitments to improving its challenges with diversity. 
We applaud those efforts. But to rectify a history as homogenous as this requires something 
more, especially given the byzantine governance structure and the limits that that structure 
imposes on centralized decision-making. 
 
16 Though not within the scope of this paper, two resources worth mentioning here are: (1) a repo rt by the 
Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum’s Sustainable Policy Institute on gender diversity that 
includes analysis of gender in senior leadership at 156 central banks around the world, including the 12 Federal 
Reserve Banks reviewed sep arately (SPI 2021); and (2) a Brookings report by Chris Brummer on the lack of 
diversity among US financial regulators (Brummer 2020). 
17 See Brookings’ Stephanie Aaronson for this broadly accepted interpretation of the Fed’s new flexible average 
inflation target (Aaronson 2020). 
17
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 20 ---
We therefore make the following three recommendations, in order of ease of 
implementation. 
(1) The Fed’s Board of Governors should make public the processes used to select Class 
C directors, including opening up that process for application and the publication of 
statistics regarding various aspects of such applications. 
(2) The Federal Reserve Banks sh ould, together, implement “best practices” for the 
selection of Class A and B directors such that the member banks that elect those 
directors can be guided by better processes. 
(3) Congress should consider discarding the boards entirely and permit a more 
accountable mechanism for Fed governance that puts governance more squarely in 
the hands of political actors who can explain, defend, and answer for the successes 
and failures of those mechanisms. 
V. Conclusion 
The Federal Reserve System has never been the model o f clear governance. But even short 
of a dramatic overhaul, it can become better. Indeed, just one year after he became the first 
Black governor of the Federal Reserve in 1966, Andrew Brimmer commissioned an internal 
report on the Reserve Bank directors, co ncluding that the Fed “should have a better 
understanding of the characteristics of this group of public servants” (Brimmer 1972) . This 
is as true today as it was 55 years ago. Our report’s biographical database and the analysis 
we have conducted herein serves as an answer, a half-century later, to Brimmer’s charge. 
If past is prologue, the future for Fed diversity at this important level is bleak. Fortunately, 
there is great hope that the past will in this case remain in the past. Directors in each class 
essentially all serve for a limit of six years. In relatively short order, then, each of the 12 
Reserve Bank boards of directors can be remade. This means progress can be made quickly, 
if prioritized. It is our hope that the data and recommendations in this  report will facilitate 
that transformation. 
  
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 21 ---
VI. References 
Aaronson, Stephanie. 2020. “A More Inclusive Employment Mandate.” Brookings Institution, 
Up Front, August 28, 2020.   
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2020/08/28/a-more-inclusive-employment-
mandate/ 
Ainsley, Caitlin. 2020. “Decentralized Central Banks: Political Ideology and the Federal 
Reserve System of Regional banks.” Governance 34, no. 2: 277–94.   
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/gove.12487 
Binder, Sarah, and Mark Spindel. 2016. “Independence and Accountability: Congress and the 
Fed in a Polarized Era.” Brookings Institution Center for Effective Public Management, April 
2016.   
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Monetary-politics.pdf 
———. 2017. The Myth of Independence: How Congress Governs the Federal Reserve . 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Bostic, Raphael. 2020a. “Using Finance to Create Racial Equ ity: A Call for Change.” Keynote 
speech delivered at the Conference on Racial Justice and Finance (virtual) , Federal Reserve 
Bank of Atlanta and Princeton University’s Bendheim Center for Finance,  September 18, 
2020.   
https://www.atlantafed.org/news/speeches/2020/09/18/bostic-using-finance-to-create-
racial-equity.aspx 
———. 2020b. “The Benefits of a Diverse and Inclusive Recovery.” Speech delivered at the 
Annual Meeting of the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association  (virtual), 
October 19, 2020.   
https://www.atlantafed.org/news/speeches/2020/10/19/bostic-benefits-of-a-diverse-
and-inclusive-recovery.aspx 
———. 2021. “Measuring the Economy in the Time of COVID.” Speech delivered at t he 
Economic Club of New York, March 25, 2021.   
https://www.atlantafed.org/news/speeches/2021/03/25/bostic-measuring-the-
economy-in-the-time-of-covid.aspx 
Brimmer, Andrew. 1972. “Characteristics of Federal Reserve Bank Directors.” Federal 
Reserve Bulletin 58, no. 6 (June): 550–59. 
Brummer, Chris. 2020. “What Do the Data Reveal about (the Absence of Black) Financial 
Regulators?” Brookings Institution Working Paper, September 2, 2020.   
https://www.brookings.edu/research/what-do-the-data-reveal-about-the-absence-of-
black-financial-regulators/ 
19
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 22 ---
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BL S). n.d. “Labor Force Participation Rate - Women 
[LNS11300002].” FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Accessed December 4, 2021. 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/LNS11300002 
Census Bureau  (CB). 2020. “QuickFacts, United States.” Accessed December 8, 2021. 
https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/RHI825219#RHI825219 
Conti-Brown, Peter. 2016. The Power and Independence of the Federal Reserve. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
———. 2020. “Restoring the Promise of Federal Reser ve Governance.” George Mason 
University, Mercatus Center Working Paper, January 3, 2020.   
https://www.mercatus.org/publications/monetary-policy/restoring-promise-fed-
governance 
Conti-Brown, Peter, Yair Listokin, and Nicholas R. Parrillo. 2021. “Towards an  
Administrative Law of Central Banking.” Yale Journal on Regulation 38, no. 1.  
https://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/yjreg/vol38/iss1/1/ 
Corser, Maggie.  2019. “The Urgent Need for a More Publicly Representative Fed: 2019 
Diversity Analysis of Federal Reserv e Bank Directors.” Fed Up and The Center for Popular 
Democracy, February 2019.   
https://populardemocracy.org/sites/default/files/FedUp-Diversity-Data-
Brief_2019_web.pdf 
———. 2021. “Unrepresentative and Unaccountable: 2021 Analysis of Diversity in Federal 
Reserve Leadership.” Fed Up and The Center for Popular Democracy , June 2021. 
https://www.populardemocracy.org/sites/default/files/20210709%20Fed-
Up%20Diversity.pdf 
Daly, Mary C. 2018. “Getting from Diversity to Inclusion in Economics.” Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco, Economic Letter No. 2018–15, June 4, 2018.   
https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-
letter/2018/june/getting-from-diversity-to-inclusion-in-economics/ 
Elul, Gabrielle. 2018. “A Seat at the Table: The Federal Reserv e Banks and the Politics of 
Governance.” PhD Dissertation. University of California, Berkeley.  
Epstein, Gerald, ed. 2005. Financialization and the World Economy. Cheltenham, UK: Edward 
Elgar Publishing.   
https://peri.umass.edu/fileadmin/pdf/programs/globalization/financialization/chapter1.
pdf 
Federal Reserve, Board of Governors of the (Fed Board). n.d.1. “Roles and Responsibilities of 
Federal Reserve Directors.”   
https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/directors/pdf/roles_responsibilities_finalw
eb013013.pdf 
20
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 23 ---
———. n.d.2.  “Directors—Appointment of Reserve Bank Presidents and First Vice 
Presidents.”   
https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/directors/PDF/appointment-of-reserve-
bank-presidents-first-vice-presidents.pdf 
Feinstein, Brian, Peter Conti-Brown, and Kaleb Nygaard. 2022. “Board Diversity Matters: An 
Empirical Assessment of Community Lending at Federal Reserve-Regulated Banks.” Working 
Paper. Harvard Law Sc hool Forum on Corporate Governance. March 8, 2022.  
https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2022/03/08/board-diversity-matters-an-empirical-
assessment-of-community-lending-at-federal-reserve-regulated-banks/ 
FRASER. n.d. “Annual Report of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1914–
2020.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.   
https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/annual-report-board-governors-federal-reserve-system-
117?browse=1970s 
Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2011. “Federal Reserve Bank Gover nance: 
Opportunities Exist to Broaden Director Recruitment Efforts and Increase Transparency.” 
Report to Congressional Addressees, GAO-12-18, October 2011.   
https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-12-18.pdf 
Haedtler, Jordan, Andrew Levin, and Valerie Wilson. 2016. “Making the Federal Reserve Fully 
Public: Why and How.” Economic Policy Institute, August 22, 2016.  
https://www.epi.org/publication/making-the-federal-reserve-fully-public-why-and-how/ 
House of Representat ives, United States  (House). 2020. “Diversity and Inclusion: Holding 
America’s Large Banks Accountable.” Report prepared by the Majority Staff of the Committee 
on Financial Services, 116th Congress, Second Session, February 2020.  
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/BA/BA13/20200212/110498/HHRG-116-BA13-
20200212-SD003-U1.pdf 
Jarque, Arantxa, and Caroline Davis. 2019. “Gender Composition of the Boards of Directors 
of the Regional Federal Reserve Banks.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond , Economics 
Quarterly 105, no. 4 (Fourth Quarter): 201–50.   
https://www.richmondfed.org/-
/media/richmondfedorg/publications/research/economic_quarterly/2019/q4/jarque.pdf 
Klein, Aaron. 2016. “The Fed’s Striking Lack of Diversity and Why It Matters.” Brookin gs 
Institution Op-Ed, August 1, 2016.   
https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/the-feds-striking-lack-of-diversity-and-why-it-
matters/ 
Klein, Aaron, and Olivia V. Weiss. 2015. “Reform the Fed? Get Rid of Groupthink.” Bipartisan 
Policy Center, April 7, 2015.   
https://bipartisanpolicy.org/blog/reform-the-fed-get-rid-of-groupthink/ 
21
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 24 ---
Kolko, Gabriel. 1965. Railroads and Regulation, 1877 –1916. Princeton, NJ : Princeton 
University Press. 
Lowenstein, Roger. 2015. America’s Bank: The Epic Struggle to Create the Federal Reserve. 
New York: Penguin Publishing Group. 
Martinez, Daniel E. , and Kelsey E. Gonzalez. 2021. “‘Latino’ or ‘Hispanic’? The 
Sociodemographic Correlates of Panethnic Label Preferences among U.S. Latinos/Hispanics.” 
Sociological Perspectives 64, no. 3. August 2021.  
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0731121420950371 
New York Times. 1971. “Nixon to Attend Rites for Young: President Orders Air Force to Fly 
the Body Home.” March 13, 1971.   
https://www.nytimes.com/1971/03/13/archives/nixon-to-attend-rites-for-young-
president-orders-air-force-to-fly.html 
Nygaard, Kaleb. 2020a. “‘The Feds could have done more and probably should have done 
more.’—Chair Powell.” Twitter, November 15, 2020, 5:57am.  
https://twitter.com/KalebNygaard/status/1327928717008572417?s=20 
———. 2020b. “Joe Biden Can Help remake the Federal Reserve So That It Actually Helps 
America’s Workers.” Business Insider, December 12, 2020.  
https://www.businessinsider.com/biden-appoint-federal-reserve-board-governor-labor-
american-working-families-2020-12 
———. 2021. “FOMC Bio, 1914-Present.” Centralverse, Research Tools.   
https://centralverse.org/FedWatcher/ResearchTools 
Powell, Jerome. 2020a. “Transcript of Chair Powell’s Press Conference , June 10, 2020.” 
Federal Reserve Board of Governors.   
https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20200610.pdf 
———. 2020b. “Transcript of Chair Powell’s Press Con ference, July 29, 2020.” Federal 
Reserve Board of Governors.   
https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20200729.pdf 
Sahm, Claudia. 2020. “Economics Is a Disgrace.” Macromom (blog), July 29, 2020.  
http://macromomblog.com/2020/07/29/economics-is-a-disgrace/ 
Saraiva, Catarina, Steve Matthews, and Dave Merrill. 2020. “Fed’s Top Ranks Dominated by 
White Men Despite Diversity Push.” Bloomberg, July 9, 2020.  
https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2020-federal-reserve-banks-diversity-hiring/ 
Sustainable Policy Institute (SPI). 2021. “OMFIF Gender Balance Index 2021.”  
https://www.omfif.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/GBI_2021-2.pdf 
22
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 25 ---
United States Congress (US Congress). 1913. “Federal Reserve Act of 1913.” H.R. 7837, Public 
Law Number 43. December 23, 1913. 
USA Facts. 2021. “In 2020, the number of unionized worker s dropped, while the share of 
union members increased.” January 29, 2021. https://usafacts.org/articles/labor -union-
membership/ 
Wessel, David, Louise Sheiner, and Michael Ng. 2019. “Gender and Racial Diversity of Federal 
Government Economists.” Hutchins Ce nter on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings , 
September 2019.   
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Diversity-report_updated-
3.pdf 
Wiebe, Robert H. 1967. The Search for Order, 1877 –1920. New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 
World Bank n.d. “Population, Female (% of Total Population) – United States.” Accessed 
December 11, 2021.   
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL.FE.ZS?locations=US 
Yellen, Janet. 2019. “Former Fed Chair Janet Yellen on Gender and Racial Diversity of the 
Federal Government’s Economists.” Remarks delivered at the Gender and Racial Diversity of 
the Federal Government’s Economists event sponsored by the Brookings Institution, 
Washington, DC, September 24, 2019.   
https://www.brookings.edu/research/former-fed-chair-janet-yellen-on-gender-and-
racial-diversity-of-the-federal-governments-economists/ 
  
23
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 26 ---
VII. Appendixes 
Appendix A: Nonwhite Directors by Federal Reserve Bank 
Figure 11: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Boston 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 12: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of New York 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Figure 13: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Philadelphia 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
25
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 28 ---
Figure 14: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Cleveland 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
26
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 29 ---
Figure 15: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Richmond 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
27
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 30 ---
Figure 16: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Atlanta 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
 
  
28
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 17: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Chicago 
 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
29
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 18: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of St. Louis 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
30
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 33 ---
Figure 19: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Minneapolis 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
31
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 34 ---
Figure 20: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Kansas City 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
32
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 35 ---
Figure 21: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Dallas 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
33
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 36 ---
Figure 22: Nonwhite Directors from the Federal Reserve District of San Francisco 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
34
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 37 ---
Appendix B: Gender and Federal Reserve Bank Directors 
Figure 23: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Boston 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
35
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 24: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of New York 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
36
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 25: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Philadelphia 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
37
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 40 ---
Figure 26: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Cleveland 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
38
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 41 ---
Figure 27: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Richmond  
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
39
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 28: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Atlanta 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
40
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 43 ---
Figure 29: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Chicago 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
41
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 44 ---
Figure 30: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of St. Louis 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
42
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 45 ---
Figure 31: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Minneapolis 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
43
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 46 ---
Figure 32: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Kansas City 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
44
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 47 ---
Figure 33: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of Dallas 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
  
45
Diversity and Governance Nygaard and Conti-Brown

--- Page 48 ---
Figure 34: Female Directors from the Federal Reserve District of San Francisco 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
 
 
46
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4