--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: John Bovenzi Lessons Learned: John Bovenzi 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2022) "Lessons Learned: John Bovenzi," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 189-191. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1423 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/5 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/5

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
 
John Bovenzi 
By Sandra Ward 
As a deputy to the chairman of the F ederal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and in his 
role as chief operating officer of the agency , John Bovenzi provided policy advice and oversaw 
the agency’s operations, including business lines, bank supervision, bank closings, deposit 
insurance, and administrative affairs. Bovenzi’s most notable role during the Global Financial 
Crisis was manning the helm of mortgage lender IndyMac after  the FDIC took it over in July 
2008 to position it for a sale. This abstract is based on an interview with Bovenzi conducted on 
December 2, 2020; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
Understand the risks: Early and ongoing analysis allows for a better response.   
Aiming for a better sense of the systemic risks lurking in the financial system, the FDIC had 
the foresight to establish a risk committee as early as 2004. The committee was made up of 
regional bank supervisors and economists. Housing quickly became a focus, based on a 
dramatic runup in prices. While many market observers underplayed concerns presented by 
the housing boom based on historical trends , the FDIC group drew different conclusions. 
Noted Bovenzi: 
The FDIC group that looked at this issue concluded . . . that this may not be the same 
as other periods in that there had been a lot of erosion in the lending sta ndards. 
Subprime mortgages had increased 10-fold, lending standards had weakened, and all 
types of new instruments were out there. So maybe this time would be different, and 
there would be a bust. 
Armed with those insights, the group turned its attentions to commercial real estate as well. 
It also established a group to examine how the agency handled bank failures to determine 
whether new policies and procedures might be needed. Said Bovenzi: 
We ran some simulations and war games to help prepare the staff, which hadn’t 
handled that many bank failures since the previous crisis in the 1980s. That was very 
helpful. Plus, we had a whole new board of directors around 2004-05. Some of those 
war games helped familiarize them with the bank failure process as well, w hich was 
also very helpful. 
As it turned out, the magnitude of the crisis couldn’t have been foreseen in its entirety and 
presented new challenges despite all the preparation. Bovenzi reflected: 
What turned out to be different was the size of some of the b ank failures; the FDIC 
had never handled failures that big. 
For small- or medium-sized banks, the bank-closing process worked very efficiently. 
For larger commercial banks, it was something new. For investment banks, it was an 
189

--- Page 4 ---
entirely different process. I t was a bankruptcy process that was not structured for 
speed and smoothness as was seen with Lehman’s collapse. These distinctions meant 
there was a lot that turned out to be new, but the early preparat ion helped the FDIC 
enormously. 
Better together: Coordinating with other agencies led to improved outcomes.  
Historical tensions and a lack of communication among the different regulatory agencies 
overseeing commercial banks threatened to undermine the response to the financial crisis 
early on. Yet as conditions worsened in 2008, coordination improved, Bovenzi shared.  
The FDIC organized weekly calls with the other bank regulatory agencies where 
senior people would go over what was happening with the worst problem bank cases, 
their status, and what kind of preparations might be needed.  
In the crisis, everybody worked be tter together, but . . . t he principals didn’t always 
agree. There were different philosophies on how things should be handled, 
particularly whether bailouts were necessary or not. There was tension but also 
constant back -and-forth over what the best steps  should be. In some cases, as 
awkward as it was, the process got to better results than what any individual agency 
would have done by taking into account the various points of view that were being 
presented and coming up with overall programs. 
Communicate: Reassuring the public and institutions helps to stabilize conditions. 
Faced with the collapse of once mighty and iconic financial institutions, Fannie Mae, Freddie 
Mac, and Lehman Brothers among them, regulators need to move quickly to calm the public 
and reassure public markets and private institutions  that financial conditions were under 
control. Bovenzi observed: 
The most important thing you can do in that situation is to provide comfort to people. 
People get c omforted if they know they’re not going to lose money and if you can 
provide liquidity so people can keep borrowing. That can keep the economy going. A 
lot of programs were set up. One of them was to raise the deposit insurance limit from 
$100,000 to $250,000, at first temporarily and then permanently. 
That helped a lot of depositors at IndyMac. It also took away some of the incentive for 
people to start runs on other banks.   
The FDIC set up the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program to provide extra deposit 
insurance on non -interest-bearing deposit accounts. We also provided some 
insurance coverage for other types of debt besides deposits, which was a first in the 
history of the FDIC. That benefited the larger banks who could borrow money in the 
capital markets.  
There were a lot of programs like that during the second half of 2008, all trying to 
stabilize the system.  
190
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Bovenzi noted that by early 2009, such programs combined with financial stress tests 
imposed on the large banks  resulted in boosting confidence in the system and calming the 
crisis.  
 
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-14 
Copyright © Yale University. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
191
Lessons Learned: John Bovenzi Ward