--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Kevin Warsh Lessons Learned: Kevin Warsh 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Kevin Warsh," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 
224-227. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1434 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/16 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/16

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Kevin Warsh 
By Matthew A. Lieber 
Kevin Warsh was a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System from 2006 
to 2011. Appointed by President George W. Bush, Warsh worked closely with Fed Chairman Ben 
Bernanke and his core group of advis ers. Throughout the financial crisis and its aftermath, h e 
was a key emissary to market participants, foreign central banks, and US political leaders in 
Congress and the executive branch. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview conducted 
with Warsh on August 24, 2020; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
Crisis response eclipses a reform agenda. 
Kevin Warsh joined the Board of Governors in January 2006 as a member of incoming Chair 
Bernanke’s team. Under Bernanke’s leadership, as Warsh explained, each governor would 
oversee a particular initiative to upgrade internal systems that the chair and the Board 
deemed vital to the Federal Reserve’s performance. Bernanke’s agenda for the entire Fed 
was to institute a fixed inflation targeting regime, to depersonalize the institution, and to 
broaden discussions within the central bank and with different external constituencies.  
Warsh’s first project was to enhance the data analysis the Fed used to info rm its decision -
making. In 2006, Warsh said, the Fed did not have a sufficiently rigorous understanding of 
the informational content in foreign exchange and capital market data. He was focused on a 
six-point agenda to supplement existing government data flows with real-time market met-
rics. “Integrating market information and more contemporaneous, real economic 
data―those were to be priorities of mine. We made only modest progress pre-crisis,” he said. 
In 2007, signs emerged of what would become the crisis. The need to mount an extraordinary 
response to the financial emergency eclipsed Bernanke’s reform agenda , including Warsh’s 
project to modernize data surveillance.  
Good fights and dissenting visions that take the form of rigorous debate can drive an 
effective policy response.  
The emergency nature of the crisis made coordination among government institutions nec-
essary and, in fact, easy. Arguments on large questions of proper authority arose, moved 
apace, and culminated in decisions and action. Customary hesitations that institutions might 
have about sharing information in normal times gave way to the exigencies of time. So did 
any political appetite to hinder the central bank from doing its job as expeditiously as possi-
ble. He noted: 
I scarcely perceived other government officials outside the four walls of the Fed trying 
to affect our autonomy to make our ultimate decisions. That’s what real independence 
is about. 
224

--- Page 4 ---
There were tensions and disagreements, but they took the form of vigorous debates to de-
termine the most effective policy response. Discussions with the White House, the Treasury, 
and leaders on Capitol Hill were straightforward and fact  based. There were differences of 
opinion throughout, though not about the problem to be solved. Rather, contention emerged 
on the solution strategy and what entity or entities should carry it out: 
There were fights, but they were good fights. They were fights where each person was 
trying to figure out the answer to the riddle, the policy response most efficacious. 
One crucial question, Warsh remembered, was about what institution had the authority to 
intervene: “Is that the job of the Fed, or is that the Treasury’s job? Or Congress’s job?” The 
discussions inside the Fed were hard fought, Warsh said, but appropriate: “the right fights.” 
One might disagree over particulars but still acknowledge the need for government action to 
go forward. In these discussions, there was room for dissenting visions.  
Even when “firefighting” a crisis, fixing a big-picture issue may be a credible response.  
A second tension W arsh pointed to was between crisis response and larger -scale thinking. 
He said: 
In firefighting mode, there was understandably difficulty in stepping back and saying, 
“Do we have a Bear Stearns problem ―or do we have a banking problem? A Fannie 
problem or a  housing problem? Do we have problems of particular institutions, or 
rather are those symptomatic of a massive liquidity shock?” 
Still, looking back now, Warsh said  that Fed policymakers got caught up in the cadence of 
crisis fighting when there were crucial moments for a larger-scale strategic policy delibera-
tion. For example, he pointed out, the Fed missed critical windows between the failure of 
Bear Stearns in March 2008 and late summer. He noted: 
There’s no one who had perfect clarity on that. But there was a window after Bear 
Stearns, between March and late summer, where there was an opportunity to have 
been more refined in our thinking . We could have examined Bear Stearns and asked 
whether it [was] more indicative than an outlier. Policymaker cadence was racing 
from fire to fire; instead, the cadence could have started earlier and should have been 
broader. 
Warsh also pointed to the case of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, arguing that policymakers 
could have pushed for the public markets to recapitalize the two federal mortgage giants. Of 
course, reforms over the prior decade would have been optimal, he recognized. “But even a 
recapitalization in the eighth inning is better than bailing them out in extra inni ngs, namely 
August or September of 2008 [when they were taken into government conservatorship],” he 
opined.  
The same was true for the largest banks, which regulators had allowed to operate with highly 
leveraged capital structures; in 2007–2008, gaping vulnerabilities were exposed. There were 
plenty of opportunities, even once the crisis had begun , to encourage, persuade, cajole the 
225
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
banks to recapitalize themselves in the public markets. “There were huge opportunities 
missed.” 
Post-crisis reforms may at fir st seem effective, but that is when you need to double  
down and push them even further.  
Warsh is largely critical of the post -crisis reforms, arguing that the regulations that would 
have made a huge difference were not adopted. For example, he said that the stress tests for 
the banks, which were helpful in 2008 and 2009, soon lost their salience and effectiveness, 
becoming an exercise in compliance. 
To back up his point, he cited the US banking sector in 2020. Whereas others have hailed 
improved capitalization levels and the banks’ stability and profitability during the pandemic, 
Warsh pointed to the massive extension of government credit in 2020: “The US government 
in March,  by necessity, had to bail everybody out, ” he pointed out,  “including the biggest 
banks, bail out the money market mutual funds, and provide full backstop of liquidity to eve-
rybody.” The banks passed the stress tests and survived the pandemic only because of the 
Fed’s massive intervention to extend them liquidity , said Warsh . The post -crisis reforms 
failed to instill financial discipline.  
Missing from the record of US reform, in Warsh’s view, were real market discipline, real cap-
ital standards, and real regulatory standards. Specifically, Warsh explained the need for mar-
ket discipline to push institutions to be accountable, citing the Fed’s sanction of too -big-to-
fail institutions and regulators’ tolerance of their opaque financial statements . He com-
mented: 
Let’s say you’re an expert on banking, and you wanted to know what was happening 
inside the business of a too -big-to-fail institution. And all you had to go by was the 
bank’s 10-Q and 10-K and annual report. You will find it nearly impossible to actually 
understand the risks in that business, their true capital and liquidity. . . . So, you might 
pull the documents of their five biggest competitors. But you’d find that incredibly 
difficult to compare. 
The opacity of the large US banks stands in contrast to firms in other industries, which are 
subject to financial market discipline. He noted: 
By contrast, knowing little about consumer products, take out the financial state-
ments of Walmart, and you’ll understand in an hour, where do they make their 
money? How much cash do they have? What are the big risks to their business? 
Washington policy experts have dismissed his critique, Warsh said, but he rejects the notion 
that banking is altogether special or deserving of special treatment.  
Three implications follow from Warsh’s critique. First , to the extent that bank finances are 
opaque, financial market discipline will not be effective. Second, absent market discipline, 
the effective government regulation of the large banks takes on added importance. Third, the 
institution that is to regulate these large banks―in the US the Federal Reserve―has officially 
226
Lessons Learned: Kevin Warsh Lieber

--- Page 6 ---
singled out eight of them as “posing the greatest risk to US financial stability” ; it is the same 
institution that has been extending massive credit to them. An obvious but troubling thought 
emerges, in terms of learned behavior in today’s context of monetary ease: Market actors 
now believe the Fed will not let any of the top eight banks fail, no matter what.  
The crisis response should be tailored to the crisis at hand.  
Warsh considered the US government actions  in 2020, borrowing from the 2008 playbook, 
“a pretty good initial response” to the COVID pandemic. But he saw a mismatch between the 
policy tools employed―primarily the monetary tools of the central bank―and the nature of 
the economic crisis that was first and foremost a Main Street shock, not a Wall Street shock . 
He said: 
Why has there been so little emphasis on the real side of the economy, which contin-
ues to be suffering relative to financial markets? Financial markets that continue to 
be subsidized.  
Warsh would have preferred that the Fed focus on Main Street businesses sooner than it did 
with its Main Street  Lending Facility, which was announced in Marc h 2020 but did not be-
come operational until June of that year. And he would have structured the program differ-
ently to make loans available in a manner more familiar to small businesses. 
Warsh also made a strong argument in support of direct income support to US households 
and persons battered by the crisis, which he differentiated from stimulus support: 
We are a rich and generous country with citizens who, through no fault of their own, 
are in terrible shape. And we should provide them support so they can survive and be 
well positioned to ultimately thrive on the other side of this. . . . that’s about helping 
those who have found themselves in a bad place and for whom we can mitigate the 
harm so that our fellow citizens are better positioned. 
We told them what they can and can’t do. We as policymakers across administrations 
of both parties ―it was our job to try to provide some insurance against these tail 
risks. We’ve not done a good enough job of preparing the economy or our citizens for 
the shock.  
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-09 
Copyright © Yale University. 
227
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3