--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 2 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Zeti Akhtar Aziz Lessons Learned: Zeti Akhtar Aziz 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Haggerty, Maryann (2022) "Lessons Learned: Zeti Akhtar Aziz," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 2, 
2046-2050. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1384 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/95 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss2/95

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz 
By Maryann Haggerty 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz, a Malaysian economist, was governor of Bank Negara Malaysia, her nation ’s 
central bank, from 2000 to 2016 ; prior to that, she was acting governor and deputy governor.  
Dr. Zeti was a key leader in Malaysia’s response to the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98, as well 
as the financial sector restructuring that followed. This “Lessons Learned” summary is based 
on a 2022 interview with Dr. Zeti. At the time of the interview, she was co-chair of the board of 
governors of the Asia School of Business in Kuala Lumpur, which is a partnership between Bank 
Negara and the MIT Sloan School of Management.  Dr. Zeti is a member of the YPFS Advisory 
Board.   
There are no one -size-fits-all solutions. Malaysia rejected the austere I nternational 
Monetary Fund (IMF)  approach to the 1997 -98 Asian financial crisis, choosing 
currency controls instead. Despite criticism, its economy rebounded. 
In mid-1997, a financial crisis that began in Thailand spread throu gh the region, including 
Malaysia. This was generally regarded as a currency crisis. 
At the time, Dr. Zeti was the chief economist at Bank Negara Malaysia, and an assistant 
governor covering the economic sector, monetary policy, reserve management , and money 
market and foreign exchange operations. She also had oversight of the foreign exchange 
administration. She said: 
The volatile capital flows started around May [1997] , when the Thai baht, the Thai 
currency, was targeted as the market had assessed it to b e overvalued. There were 
therefore continuous speculative attacks on the currency, which was subsequently 
felt throughout the region, including in Malaysia. 
As liquidity tightened, following the outflows, our role [at the Bank] was to provide 
liquidity. The currency had also beg un to depreciate in a discontinuous manner, 
meaning that there were abrupt changes in the trading range during that period of 
time. And so, intervention operations were also undertaken to stabilize the cur rency 
market. 
Despite the currency crisis  and a large pre -existing current account deficit , the Malay sian 
economy remained strong through  much of the year. G rowth slow ed from about 9% 
annually—overheated in the eyes of some —to about 7%. By December, though , financial 
institutions were feeling stress. “This financial stress followed the depreciation of the 
currency and the collapse of the stock market, which fell by about 50% at that time,” Dr. Zeti 
recalled. 
2046

--- Page 4 ---
As the months of the new year passed , Malaysia faced pressure, especially from the IMF, to 
manage the crisis by raising interest rates and taking other austerity measures. Thailand, 
Indonesia, and South Korea agreed to an IMF bailout program, but Malaysia did not. 
Tensions built in the Malaysian financial and political systems. In August 1998, the governor 
and deputy governor of the Bank stepped down. Dr. Zeti was promoted to acting governor. 
“And at that point in time, I would describe Malaysia was about to breach its tipping point,” 
she recalled. “By this time, the currency had depreciated by about 32%. … The currency had 
experienced wave after wave of depreciation. The stock market had also collapsed by about 
70%.” 
Days after her appointment, she announced that the government was imposing a set of 
currency controls—an approach to the crisis far different from that in the rest of the region. 
The Malaysian ringgit was non-internationalized, which prevented trading in  the currency 
in offshore currency centers  that were a source of speculation. Currency was also made 
subject to a 12 -month holding period, meaning i f the currency was in the country, it would 
have to stay there for a year. 
The Malaysian economy quickly bounced back, posting 6% growth in 1999. “Essentially it 
was a V -shaped recover y,” Dr. Zeti said. The region’s other countries also recovered, 
including those in the IMF program.  
But, Malaysia’s approach was condemned by many in the international financial markets. 
The main concern was that funds were trapped inside the country and counterparties were 
not sure, despite assurances from the government, that they would be able to take the money 
out of the country in 12  months. But Dr. Zeti strongly defends  the controls as the right 
solution for her country at the time and afterward. In response to critics at one conference 
who said that Malaysia hadn’t needed the controls to manage the crisis, she responded: 
I said, “Malaysia recovered at the lowest cost in the history of financial crises. The cost 
of the crisis was something like less than 5% of GDP. That includes the fiscal cost, the 
cost to labor dislocation, and other costs. ” It was very low compared to the cost that 
generations are still paying for in Korea, in Thailand, and in Indonesia. For them it 
was somewhere between 30 to 40% of GDP. So, I said, “Surely this mattered.” 
Don’t wait for a crisis to assess your vulnerabilities. 
In the mid-1990s, before the crisis, the Malaysian economy was hot, with GDP growth of 9 -
10% and credit growth of 20 -30%. The current account deficit was “massive,” Dr. Zeti said, 
at about 10% of GDP. She said: 
The argument made at that time was that Malaysia was receiving a significant inflow 
of foreign direct investment during this period that covered this deficit. The economy 
was viewed very positively. It was therefore highlighted that this deficit was being 
financed by long-term foreign direct investment and not short-term inflows.  
2047
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
But we did recognize at that time that this was an area of vulnerability and that it 
posed a risk to our economy and to our financial system. Macroprudential measures 
were thus aggressively implemented—although we were not clever enough to call it 
that. But essentially that was what were implemented. It included placing limits on 
lending to the property sector and the financing of activity in the stock market and so 
on. There were other limits that were impos ed on the portfolio of the banking 
institutions aimed at reining in the excesses and risks to our financial system and to 
our economy. 
That paid off when things went bad. Dr. Zeti said: 
The first lesson was the importance of determining and managing our ar eas of 
vulnerability. For us, it was our huge current account deficit, the rapid credit growth, 
and the rising domestic indebtedness. Policies were implemented during that time to 
address these issues and it produced results. So , when we entered into the c risis, it 
was at a much stronger position than the two years earlier, where we would have 
been in a similar position as in Thailand that had these risks during the time of the 
crisis. 
Understand the nature of the crisis. In 1997 -98, that meant understandi ng currency 
markets. 
The Asian financial crisis began with the Thai baht. But currency markets are international , 
and contagion crosses borders. In 1997 -98, the Malaysian ringgit came under repeated 
attacks from speculators in international markets, Dr. Zeti said. Fighting contagion requires 
knowing how those markets operate, she said, and what weapons a nation has in dealing 
with attacks on its currency. She explained: 
This crisis started as a currency crisis. It is therefore important to understand the 
foreign exchange market, the dynamics of this market, that it is prone to 
discontinuous adjustments, that it is prone to over -adjustment, and that it does not 
have self -equilibrating forces to return it to levels where it would reflect the 
underlying fundamentals of the economy. 
In other words, during normal circumstances, when you are not in the crisis, the rates 
are expected to return to levels where it reflects the underlying economic 
fundamentals. During a crisis, however, it will tend to go further and further away 
from its equilibrium point. It is also important to understand the role of the major 
players in the market, including that of hedge funds —to understand how they take 
positions on currencies and so on. I personally spent a lot of time in the dealing room 
with the dealers, in particular at the ringgit desk. They engaged with the 
counterparties who would inform them that they had orders to sell off the currency 
at the various levels and at which rate. We could therefore see that they were dealing 
with hundreds of millions and therefore, we knew that the resources that they had 
far exceeded the resources that we had. We knew that we didn ’t have that kind of 
resources to defend our currency. 
2048
Lessons Learned: Zeti Akhtar Aziz Haggerty

--- Page 6 ---
And therefore, the lesson here is to understand the dynamic s of the market, the 
different behaviors of the various players in the market such as that of investors and 
those such as hedge funds which produce different kinds of movements in the market. 
Sometimes it would be futile, absolutely futile to defend a curr ency. You would in no 
time deplete your reserves. And that is what brought a number of the countries to 
eventually come under an IMF program. 
Guarding the ringgit from continued speculation was a primary goal of the 1998 currency 
controls, she said. It was  a necessary step toward stabilizing the domestic economy and 
financial system. 
A nation must determine its own objectives and communicate them. 
At one point, the IMF wanted Malaysia to raise interest rates by 5 percentage points, Dr. Zeti 
said, and allow the currency exchange rate to adjust. “They said Malaysia had a relatively 
strong economy, and so, the exchange rate would adjust right back to where it would reflect 
the underlying fundamentals.”  
But Malaysia believed the currency markets were “irrational,” she said, and would not reflect 
fundamentals. It rejected the IMF’s ideas and did not raise rates. She recalled: 
Of course, when Malaysia did not adopt the IMF prescriptions—this was even before 
the controls were implemented —there was widespread condemnation. This was 
mainly for not raising rates. The IMF made interventions at various international 
meetings and issued press statements that Malaysia failed to raise interest rates and 
that this was causing our currency to depreciate and so on. The condemnation by the 
IMF and the international community was indeed very overwhelming for us. There 
was not much we could do but to present our case. But it wasn’t listened to much. We 
nevertheless continued to pursue our own policies that we assessed to be in the best 
interest of our country. So that was our focus ; we had very specific goals to achieve. 
They were  three-fold: to restore stability in our financial markets , to repair our 
financial system, and to bring about an economic recovery. 
Thus, we had three very specific objectives for our policies. There was therefore also 
an important role for communications. Since we didn’t succeed in getting acceptance 
from the international community, we focused on our domestic community. And this 
was important because although Malaysia did have some domestic capital outflows, 
there was no large-scale domestic capital flight. The role of communications is a very 
important lesson. Information was provided on a daily basis to the financial industry, 
to the businesses, and to the public at large about our policies, the rationale for these 
policies, and our assessment of the impact of these policies. 
 
Dated: July 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021-40 
2049
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
2050
Lessons Learned: Zeti Akhtar Aziz Haggerty