--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 2 
2022 
United Kingdom: Indexed Long-Term Repo Operations United Kingdom: Indexed Long-Term Repo Operations 
Sean Fulmer 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Fulmer, Sean (2022) "United Kingdom: Indexed Long-Term Repo Operations," Journal of Financial Crises: 
Vol. 4 : Iss. 2, 1126-1155. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1341 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/52 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss2/52

--- Page 3 ---
United Kingdom: Indexed Long-Term  
Repo Operations1 
Sean Fulmer2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
June 15, 2022; revised October 12, 2022 
Abstract 
Before the Global Financial Crisis of 2007 –09, the Bank of England regularly used monthly 
Long-Term Repo (LTR) operations at a range of maturities to manage its balance sheet. As 
market liquidity tightened in late 2007, the Bank introduced the Extended Collateral Long -
Term Repo (ELTR) program to le nd larger amounts of sterling cash against a wider set of 
collateral at three -month maturities. In June 2010, the Bank replaced the ELTRs with the 
Indexed Long-Term Repo (ILTR) program to make the wider set of collateral a permanent 
part of its toolkit. The ILTR operations auctioned liquidity at three- and six-month maturities 
against an expanded set of collateral and at cheaper rates than the ELTRs. The Bank designed 
the ILTRs as a multi -good auction, a new technique that had the advantages of auctioning 
liquidity against specific levels of collateral that varied in quality. According to officials at the 
Bank, this is a unique innovation in liquidity provision. Counterparties could submit bids 
against a “narrow” set of collateral, a “wider” set, or both in a “paired” bid. In times of stress, 
the ILTRs automatically allocate a greater proportion of liquidity against less -liquid 
collateral. All successful bidders paid the lowest accepted bid on each collateral set. In 2014, 
the Bank made changes to the ILTR op erations by standardizing the maturity offere d, 
introducing a variable liquidity supply,  expanding the collateral, and recalibrating to yield 
lower prices. The new ILTR operations respond to market -wide stress by lending a greater 
proportion of funds against less-liquid collateral and an increased amount of overall liquidity 
due to the lack of a fixed supply 
Keywords: Auction theory, Bank of England , Indexed-Long-Term Repo,  ILTR, Sterling 
Monetary Framework, United Kingdom   
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering broad -based emergency lending  programs. Cases are available from the Journal of 
Financial Crises at   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Research Associate , YPFS, Yale School of Management . The author would like to thank Paul Klemperer and 
Charlotte Grace for their insightful comments. 
1126

--- Page 4 ---
Overview 
Prior to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), the 
Bank of England (the Bank) used long -term 
repo operations (LTRs) at a range of 
maturities to manage its balance sheet (Frost, 
Govier, and Horn 2015) . The operations did 
not provide a significant amount of liq uidity 
to the banking sector, but that changed in 
2007. To restore liquidity to frozen funding 
markets, especially against less  liquid 
collateral, the Bank in December 2007 
introduced Extended Collateral Long -Term 
Repo (ELTR) operations (Fulmer 2022b). The 
ELTRs exchanged sterling cash for an 
expanded set of less liquid collateral at three-
month maturities. The ELTRs utilized a 
discriminatory price auction in which 
successful bidders paid their own bid, and a 
single-good auction format wherein 
counterparties initially bid against a single 
pool of eligible collateral and later faced 
different minimum bids across collateral sets 
within the same auction  (Frost, Govier, and 
Horn 2015). 
As the stress of the GFC passed, the Bank 
decided to make the broader pool of  
collateral a permanent feature of its LTRs. In 
June 2010, the Bank of England replaced the 
ELTRs with Indexed Long-Term Repo (ILTR) 
operations, which utilized a much more 
sophisticated design derived from auction 
theory. The ILTRs used a multi -good auction 
format; counterparties split their eligible 
collateral into two pools: “narrow,” which 
consisted of high -quality sovereign 
securities, and “wider,” which included a 
wide range of highly rated but less liquid 
securities (Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015) . 
Counterparties submitted bids 
simultaneously against either set of eligible 
collateral or both, using a “paired” bid (Bank 
of England 2010a) . All successful bidders 
paid the lowest accepted bid  on each 
collateral set , expressed as a spread to the Bank Rate (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011) . 
Key Terms 
Purpose: To “provide liquidity insurance without 
distorting banks’ incentives for prudent liquidity 
management, and whilst minimising the risk being 
taken onto the Bank’s own balance sheet” (Bank of 
England 2010a) 
Launch Dates June 2010  
(first iteration) 
February 2014  
(second iteration)  
Expiration Dates n/a 
Legal Authority  Pre-existing authority  
Peak Outstanding GBP 29 billion (July 
2020) 
Participants Banks and building 
societies  
Rate Successful bidders paid 
the lowest accepted bid 
on each collateral set 
Collateral Two, later three, sets of 
eligible collateral that 
were bid on separately  
Loan Duration Initially three- and six-
month maturity 
options; later 
standardized to only six 
months 
Notable Features Standing facility; 
sophisticated auction 
theory; variable supply; 
participants could bid 
on separate sets of 
collateral 
Outcomes No notable issues or 
breakdowns in liquidity 
provision 
1127
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Every calendar quarter, the Bank offered two ILTR auctions at a term of three months and 
one auction at a term of six months (Bank of England 2010a). 
In 2012, the Bank of England released the Winters Review, an independent r eview which 
assessed how the Bank  provided liquidity to the financial system and considered the new 
programs created during the Global Financial Crisis (Winters 2012) . This report 
recommended that the Bank of England combine the ILTR facility with the Extended 
Collateral Term Repo facility (ECTR), a shorter -term liquidity facility the Bank had created 
in 2011 during the euro crisis that accepted a broader range of collateral than the ILTRs. 
Instead of merging these two facilities, the Bank of England de cided to significantly expand 
the ILTR facility in 2014 by setting the maturity for all auctions at six months, further 
extending the eligible set of collateral by introducing a third set, tying the quantity of 
liquidity offered to market conditions , and r ecalibrating to yield lower prices  (Bank of 
England 2013) . Additionally, they retained the ECTR facility as an adaptable contingent 
facility in case of a future crisis (Fulmer 2022a). For this case, ILTRs prior to 2014 will be 
referred to as “the first iteration” and those occurring in or after 2014 will be referred to as 
“the second iteration.” 
Summary Evaluation 
The Bank of England has boasted of the ILTR’s design and implementation. The former 
Governor of the Bank of England referred to the ILTR design as “a marvellous application of 
theoretical economics to a practical program of vital importance”  (The Economist 2012). A 
Deputy Governor called the operations “a world first in central banking... potentially a major 
step forward in practical policies to support financial stability” (Klemperer 2018).  
While the ILTRs were nearly fully subscribed at the start, uptake dropped significantly 
around 2012 (see Figure 1 ). The Winters Review (2012) provided three factors that may 
explain this low uptake. First, ther e was low demand for reserves against a narrow set of 
collateral as a result of the Bank’s quantitative easing program, as well as widespread 
availability on the private market. Second, in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, 
banks had reduced their holding of assets that would fall into the wider set of collateral. The 
value of this wider collateral dropped as a result of stricter regulatory changes that ruled 
some of these assets illiquid. Thus, banks had a much lower need to obtain liquidity aga inst 
the collateral pool targeted by the facility. Last, the relatively short term of the ILTRs did not 
help the banks reach their regulatory liquidity requirements, a common reason to borrow 
from refinancing operations. The post -crisis regulatory requirem ents only recognized 
funding with more than three months of remaining maturity, which excluded the majority of 
ILTR funding (Winters 2012).  
1128
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1: Allocation of ILTRs in the First Iteration 
 
Source: Bank of England n.d.b. 
In 2018, the Bank of England released an updated evaluation of its liquidity facilities, 
including the ILTRs. In the section regarding the ILTRs, the Bank stated that, “As we 
understand, no other central bank has employed such a sophisticated approach” 
(Independent Evaluation Office 2018). While there was some increased usage around the EU 
referendum, the Bank noted in 2018 that “the auction mechanism is yet to be tested in a 
severe liquidity stress” (Independent Evaluation Office 2018). Indeed, participants only paid 
above the minimum price in two auctions from 2013–16. However, the Covid pandemic has 
somewhat tested the system since, shown by a large increase in usage (and higher prices) in 
March 2020. (See Figure 2 for the allocation of ILTRs in the second iteration across the three 
collateral sets. Note that this figure uses a slightly different y-axis scale than Figure 1.) 
1129
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 2: Allocation of ILTRs in the Second Iteration 
 
Source: Bank of England n.d.a. 
  
1130
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 8 ---
Context: United Kingdom 2010–2011 
GDP 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU  
converted to USD) 
$2.482 trillion in 2010 
$2.662 trillion in 2011 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU  
converted to USD) 
$39,436 in 2010 
$42,039 in 2011 
Sovereign credit rating  
(five-year senior debt) 
Data for 2010: 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
Fitch: AAA 
 
Data for 2011: 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAAu 
Fitch: AAA 
Size of banking system $4.635 trillion in 2010 
$4.708 trillion in 2011 
Size of banking system  
as a percentage of GDP 
186.72% in 2010 
176.83% in 2011 
Size of banking system  
as a percentage of financial system 
Data not available for 2010 
Data not available for 2011 
Five-bank concentration of banking system 76% in 2010 
76% in 2011 
Foreign involvement in banking system 15% in 2010 
15% in 2011 
Government ownership of banking system 26% in 2010 
Data not available for 2011 
Existence of deposit insurance 
100% insurance on deposits up to 
£85,000 in 2010 
100% insurance on deposits up to 
£85,000 in 2011 
Sources: Bloomberg , World Bank Global Financial Development Database , World 
Bank Deposit Insurance Dataset , Cull et al. “Bank Ownership –Trends and 
Implications.” 
1131
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: The ILTR program was a standing facility that the Bank of England used 
to provide liquidity insurance to the banking sector.  
During the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), the Bank of England expanded its open market 
operations (OMOs), both in size and eligible collateral (Bank of England 2010a) . While the 
specific actions the Bank took during the crisis were nominally temporary, the Bank stated 
in a 2008 consultative paper that it intended to permanently expand the eligible collateral of 
long-term repo operations (Bank of England 2008c) . The ILTRs replaced the three -month, 
extended-collateral, long-term (ELTR) repos that the Bank had created in December 2007, 
at the height of the crisis. It also replaced the regular three -, six-, nine-, and twelve -month 
long-term repos the Bank conducted (Bank of England 2010b). 
In a position paper describing the structure of the ILTRs, the Bank stated the guiding purpose 
of the operations (Bank of England 2010a): 
The primary objective of the new operat ions is to provide liquidity insurance without 
distorting banks’ incentives for prudent liquidity management, and whilst minimising 
the risk being taken onto the Bank’s own balance sheet. 
In the explanation of the second iteration of the ILTRs, the Bank pr ovided another 
description of the ILTRs’ purpose (Bank of England 2013): 
Banks seeking a regular source of liquidity against the widest range of collateral should 
expect to rely primarily on the monthly ILTR auctions… with the Bank being willing to 
supply an increasing amount of liquidity as signs of market stress rise. 
2. Legal Authority: The Bank of England utilized its pre -existing authority to 
implement financial operations in times of stress to create the ILTRs.  
In 2006, HM Treasury, the Bank of England,  and the Financial Services Authority signed a 
memorandum of understanding establishing their individual responsibilities and powers as 
they relate to matters of financial stability. This memorandum stated that the Bank of 
England operates in “the markets to deal with fluctuations in liquidity” and can undertake, 
in times of crisis, “financial operations … in order to limit the risk of problems in or affecting 
particular institutions spreading to other parts of the financial system” (HMT, BOE, FSA 
2006). The memorandum further provided instructions on how the Bank can respond to a 
crisis of financial stability. 
The Bank would have specific responsibility for (HMT, BOE, FSA 2006, sec. 17[ii]):  
maintaining, through its market operations and as banker to the b anking system, 
operational contacts with market participants so as to monitor and, as necessary, 
facilitate the functioning of UK markets; this may include the provision of liquidity 
assistance or other support operations.  
1132
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 10 ---
Consistent with the memorandum o f understanding , t he Bank relied on its pre -existing 
authority to implement financial operations in times of stress to create the ILTRs.  The Bank 
never refers to specific legislation in any of its discussion of ILTRs , and research could not 
determine legis lation that narrowly authorized a program like the ILTRs. The Winters 
Review, which analyzed the Bank’s approach to liquidity provision, never mentioned 
legislation or statutory authority, instead focusing on the wide range of authority vested in 
the Gover nor of the Bank (Winters 2012) . Therefore, it seems likely that the Bank is 
relatively unrestricted in its power to implement lending programs. 
3. Part of a Package: The Bank of England did not introduce the ILTRs in a package 
with other facilities , but changes in 2013 –14 to the ILTRs accompanied 
adjustments to the Bank’s liquidity provision framework.  
In 2008, the Bank released a consultative paper on the development of the Bank’s market 
operations. In this paper, the Bank stated that it intended to permanently expand the 
temporary ELTR operations but sought consultations from market participants first in order 
to determine the best structure. Therefore, the Bank did not unveil the ILTR operations in 
2010 in response to financial instability, but rather as a result of lessons learned from the 
GFC. In fact, the paper stated that it focused on “plans for a permanent framework that will 
persist once the current crisis has eventually passed” (Bank of England 2008c). Due to this, 
the Bank did not create the ILTRs in a package along with other facilities. 
In 2013 –14, the Bank adjusted its long -term repo operations again. This time, the Bank 
responded to critiques of its liquidity provision facilities in the Wint ers Report. In addition 
to changes to the ILTRs, the Bank repriced and adjusted the Discount Window Facility to 
make it more accessible to participants, broadened the collateral eligible for its liquidity 
facilities, agreed to work closer with regulators t o ensure that liquidity provision did not 
hinder regulatory efforts, and implemented stronger governance of its liquidity provision 
framework, along with other changes (Bank of England 2013). 
4. Management: The Bank of England managed the ILTR operations as a  permanent 
facility in its Sterling Monetary Framework.  
The Bank of England operated the ILTR operations as a part of its Sterling Monetary 
Framework (Bank of England 2010b). Since the ILTRs are an adapted form of its regular open 
market operations, the B ank of England did not implement specific oversight measures.  It 
did, however, commission its Independent Evaluation Office in 201 6 to assess its liquidity 
provision framework (including the ILTR), with the results released in 2018.  This report 
states that the Financial Policy Committee received “formal authority” in 2017 to approve 
adjustments to the liquidity facilities operated by the Bank (Independent Evaluation Office 
2018). Prior to this, it had a merely advisory role, with the Governor of the Bank maintaining 
sole authority over the ILTR program. 
1133
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
5. Administration: The ILTRs  allocate liquidity to bidders  using a sophisticated 
design structure informed by theoretical auction theory. 
Auction Design  
The ELTR program, which was the precursor to the ILTR, functioned as a single-good auction 
with discriminatory pricing. Under this design, counterparties bid against a single pool of 
collateral and, if successful, paid the rate that they bid (Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015). As the 
Bank expanded the eligible set of collateral for ELTRs, it introduced a minimum bid of 50 
basis points for bids against the expanded, less -liquid set of collateral (Bank of England 
2008b). (See Figure 3 for a breakdown of changes in auction design.) 
1134
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 3: Comparison of Major Components of ELTRs and ILTRs 
Program ELTR  
(precursor to the 
ILTR) 
ILTR  
(First Iteration) 
ILTR 
(Second Iteration) 
Type of Auction Single-good auction 
with discriminatory 
pricing (modified to 
include different 
minimum bids across 
collateral sets) 
Product-mix, multi-
good auction with 
uniform pricing 
Product-mix, multi-good 
auction with uniform 
pricing 
Collateral Groups One pool Two pools Three pools 
Permitted Bids 10 bids allowed, but 
<20% of the total 
funds available during 
an auction 
Unlimited but <30% 
of the total funds 
available during an 
auction 
Unlimited number of bids 
and quantity of requested 
liquidity  
Rate 
Determination 
Bank accepts bids, 
high to low, until all 
amounts allocated 
Bank determines cut-
off price for each pool 
of collateral (Clearing 
Spread) 
Bank determines cut-off 
price for each pool of 
collateral (Clearing 
Spread) 
Rate Paid by 
Successful 
Bidders 
Rate Bid Cut-off price for the 
pool 
Cut-off price for the pool 
Allocation Highest bids accepted 
until all offered funds 
allocated 
All bids above the cut-
off price are accepted 
All bids above the cut-off 
price are accepted 
Frequency Varied (from weekly 
to monthly)  
Monthly Monthly (weekly during 
times of stress) 
Fixed vs. Variable 
Supply of 
Liquidity 
Fixed Fixed Variable 
Sources: Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011; Bank of England 2010a.  
In 2010, the new ILTR operations utilized a multi-good auction with uniform pricing, which 
the Bank called a “product -mix auction” (Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015; Fisher, Frost, a nd 
Weeken 2011).3 In a product-mix auction, multiple products are available and participants 
can bid multiple times, both within and across varieties (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011) . 
For example, a participant could submit a single bid to purchase 50 uni ts of the premium 
 
3 Paul Klemperer invented the concept for a product-mix auction in 2007–08 for the Bank (Klemperer 2018).  
1135
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
quality good for $100 per unit or to purchase 50 units of the standard quality good for $75 
per unit. The auctioneer would then consider all of the bids submitted and determine a cut-
off price per unit for each variety of product. 4 The auctioneer would accept every bid above 
the cut -off price and the bidders would pay the cut -off price (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 
2011). 
In the first iteration of the ILTRs, the bidders were the counterparties eligible  for the 
operations and the products were the “wider” and “narrow” sets of eligible collateral. Eligible 
counterparties could bid for sterling cash against either set of eligible collateral or both, 
known as a “paired” bid (Bank of England 2010a). The Bank called the accepted cut-off price 
the “clearing spread.” 
The other dimension by which liquidity operations can vary is the size of allotment. The Bank 
of England did not fix the proportion of funds al located to the wider and narrow sets of 
collateral (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011). Instead, the proportion of liquidity provided to 
each collateral pool depended on the intersection point of two important components: the 
allocation frontier and the relative supply schedule (RSS).  
ILTR auctions determine one cut-off price for each set of collateral. The Bank does this by 
first constructing a demand curve, known as the allocation frontier, from the submitted bids. 
This allocation frontier maps out the difference between the two cut -off prices against the 
proportion of liquidity demanded against the wider collateral set. The intersection of this 
frontier with the Bank's supply schedule then determines the percentage allocated to wider 
collateral and the difference between the cutoff prices, from which it is possible to determine 
the actual cut-off price for each set of collateral (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011). See Figure 
4 for an example of this. In terms of the economics, this means that the auction automatically 
adjusts to implement the competitive equilibrium.  Since the ILTRs allow banks to submit 
more sophisticated bids that more closely resemble their funding needs, cut-off prices , 
especially for the wider set of collateral, therefore rise during t imes of systemic stress, 
providing the Bank with an “early warning indicator” (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011). 
The relative supply schedule represented the supply preferences of the Bank of England 
(Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011) . The Bank determined this supply schedule (prior to the 
auction) according to three considerations: 
• The Bank wanted to regularly allocate funds against wider collateral in times of 
financial stability, in order to ensure that counterparties understood the design and 
process. 
• The Bank should not undermine counterparties’ incentives to prudently manage 
 
4 In the case of a paired bid where more than one of the sub -bids are accepted, the auctioneer accepts the bid 
that is the greatest distance above its respective cut-off price. Using the same example, if the cut -off price for 
the premium and standard quality goods were $90 and $70, respectively, then the bidder would receive 50 
units of the premium good at $90 per unit, since the bidder gets $10 of value from that exchange (the difference 
between her bid and the price she pays) relative to $5 for the standard quality good (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 
2011). 
1136
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 14 ---
their liquidity (the moral hazard concern). 
• In times of stress, the ILTR auctions should allocate a greater proportion of funds 
against wider collateral. 
The Bank of England has not publicly released its actual relative supply schedule , further 
reducing any scope for counterparties to game the system (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011).  
Figure 4 provides a highly stylized example of how the Bank used the allocation frontier and 
the relative supply schedule to determine the allocation of liquidity. The downward-sloping 
step-wise functions are the allocation frontiers, depending on the level of stress affecting the 
banking sector. The upward-sloping red line represents the relative supply schedule of the 
Bank. The point of intersection between the two components represents the equilibrium 
level of liquidity allocation. Note that a situation with systemic stress results in an expansion 
in lending against wider col lateral, while a single instance of stress to one bank does not 
typically affect the allocation. However, a very large, systemically important institution with 
a high-liquidity request could cause the allocation to increase. 
Figure 4: Stylized Equilibrium Example 
 
Source: Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011. 
This process became more complex with the addition of a third set of collateral in the second 
iteration of the ILTRs (see K ey Design Decision No. 11, “Eligible Collateral”). The Bank 
referred to the new set as “Level C;” narrow collateral was “Level A;” and the original wider 
set was “Level B.” Along with three closing spreads, the new ILTRs used two supply curves. 
The first curve determined the proportion of liquidity allocated to Levels B and C collateral 
combined. The second curve then split that proportion between Levels B and C. For example, 
if the prices and quantities bid on Levels B and C were relatively high compared to Level A, 
a greater proportion of liquidity would go to Levels B and C. Likewise, if the prices and 
quantities bid on Level C were relatively high compared to Level B, a greater proportion of 
funds would go to Level C (Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015). 
1137
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
Again, the Bank did not reveal the details of the two supply curves it used to determine  
allocations. However, the Bank did state the following two principles guiding the curves: 
• The Bank wants to lend a limited proportion of liquidity against each collateral set, 
likely so that participants understand the process for times of stress and 
• the ILTR operations should automatically provide more liquidity against a collateral 
set if the demand for liquidity against that set increases  (Frost, Govier, and Horn 
2015). 
Frequency 
Initially, ILTR operations occurred once a month (Bank of England n.d.b).  
In September 2014, the Bank’s Governors considered increasing the frequency of ILTRs to 
prepare for the upcoming Scotland independence referendum. If the “yes” side won the 
referendum, the Bank planned to immediately announce weekly ILTR operations until t he 
already scheduled operation in October. The Financial Policy Committee (FPC) of the Bank 
advised avoiding pre-announcements of these operations as it could spark unintended panic 
(Bank of England 2014b) . However, this contingency was not activated as th e “yes” side 
failed (Independent Evaluation Office 2018).  
As the EU Referendum approached in June 2016, the Bank again began preparing 
contingency plans in March 2016 (Bank of England 2016) . The FPC welcomed the Bank’s 
early announcement of weekly ILTR op erations timed around the referendum, which 
contrasted with the FPC’s reticence to announce weekly ILTRs prior to the Scotland 
referendum (Independent Evaluation Office 2018). From June to September 2016, the Bank 
conducted weekly ILTRs (Bank of England n.d.a). (See Figure 5 for a graphical representation 
of how ILTR operations allocate more funds in times of financial stress , as the Scotland 
referendum failed but the EU referendum passed.) 
1138
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 5: ILTR Allocation around the Scotland and EU Referenda 
 
Source: Independent Evaluation Office 2018. 
As the UK came closer to officially leaving the EU, the Bank again implemented weekly ILTRs 
from mid-March to the end of April 2019 (Bank of England n.d.a) . The Bank continuously 
extended weekly ILTRs until October 2019, when the Bank announced that the ILTRs would 
be weekly until further notice (Bank of England 2019a; 2019b) . Soon after the United 
Kingdom officially left the European Union on January 31, 2020, the COVID -19 pandemic 
spread globally, ensuring that th e ILTRs continued to operate on a weekly basis (Bank of 
England n.d.a). 
6. Eligible Participants: Institutions that could participate in  open market 
operations at the Bank and report Eligible Liabilities to the Bank were eligible for 
the ILTR operations. 
Institutions that could both participate in open -market operations at the Bank and report 
Eligible Liabilities to the Bank were eligible for the ILTR operations (Bank of England 2010b). 
The Bank allowed the following institutions to participate in OMOs: 
• Banks and building societies5 eligible to participate in the reserves scheme  
• Other banks, building societies , and securities dealers auth orized under the 
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 that are active intermediaries in the 
sterling markets (Bank of England 2008a) 
In its explanation of the second iteration of the ILTRs, the Bank noted that banks had 
expressed uncertainty about who w as eligible for the facilities in the Sterling Monetary 
Framework, which includes the ILTRs. The Bank stated that all banks and building societies 
 
5 A building society is a financial institution owned by its members that provides mortgage loans and savings 
accounts. 
1139
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
authorized by the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) should have full access to the 
Sterling Monetary Framework (Bank of England 2013).  
The Bank of England noted that the ILTR operations were not Shari’ah compliant. Islamic 
banking prohibits the payment or receipt of interest and the ILTRs were interest -based. To 
account for this, the Bank of England created a secondary liquidity facility for Islamic banks 
that could not access liquidity through the Sterling Monetary Framework (Rahman 2017).  
7. Funding Source and Allocation: The Bank of England funded the ILTR operations 
on its balance sheet. 
Like its regular OMOs, the Bank of England financed the ILTRs on its balance sheet. The Bank 
did not predetermine an amount allocated to ILTR operations as they were a permanent 
standing facility in the Sterling Monetary Framework.  
8. Program Size: Initially, ILTR auctions had a fixed supply of liquidity available, but 
the second iteration transitioned to a variable supply dependent on market 
conditions. 
The ILTRs served as a permanent standing facility in the Sterling Monetary Framework and 
thus, did not hav e a set total size. In the position paper detailing the operations, the Bank 
anticipated that about GBP 15 billion would be offered in each calendar quarter, across three 
auctions. However, the Bank noted that it could increase this amount if the bids reve aled 
strained financial conditions (Bank of England 2010a).  
During the first iteration of the ILTRs (from June 2010 to February 2014), the Bank actually 
undershot this framework, offering two GBP 5 billion auctions at a three-month maturity and 
one GBP 2.5 billion auction at a six-month maturity every calendar quarter for a total of GBP 
12.5 billion. In total, during the first iteration, the Bank lent about GBP 71 billion across 44 
auctions. While the ILTRs were nearly fully subscribed at the start, uptake  dropped 
significantly around 2012, with the remaining operations only once reaching above 10% 
subscription (Bank of England n.d.b) .6 See Figure 6 for this dynamic over time. This figure 
shows the cumulative sum of bids against the narrow and wider set of  collateral, relative to 
the cumulative sum of auction sizes (known as a cover ratio). That is, in the entirety of the 
first iteration of the ILTRs, participants had bid on a little more than half of the liquidity 
offered in auctions by the Bank. At the st art of the ILTRs, this is much higher, as earlier 
auctions were oversubscribed, but as market conditions normalized, less demand for 
liquidity for the Bank brings this cumulative cover ratio down. 
 
6 While the Bank of England did make significant changes to the ILTR design in 2014, the drop-off in ILTR usage 
from 2012 to 2014 might have been  demand-driven, due to the introduction of other facilities (such as the 
Funding for Lending Scheme and ECTR operations) and increased liquidity supply from the Euro area. For more 
detailed information regarding other facilities, see Fulmer 2022a and Churm et al 2012. 
1140
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 6: Cumulative Cover Ratio for the First Iteration of ILTRs 
 
 
Source: Bank of England n.d.b. 
In the second iteration of the ILTRs, the Bank removed the fixed -total-size element of its 
auctions. Instead, the ILTR operations provided a greater amount of liquidity in each auction 
if the pattern of bids submitt ed indicated an increase in market stress (Bank of England 
2014a). 
If the Bank of England continued to use a fixed auction amount, this would have resulted in 
higher spreads paid by successful bidders in times of crisis. In contrast, moving to a variable 
supply allowed for both a lower price of participation and a higher quantity of liquidity 
provided to the system. Although the Bank has not made its exact supply function public 
information, it is an upward -sloping supply curve (Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015 ). Figure 7 
provides the Bank’s stylized depiction of the dynamic at play in the supply of ILTRs.  
1141
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 7: Variable versus Fixed Supply 
 
Source: Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015. 
Since the second iteration of the ILTRs removed the fixed supply of liquidity on offer, it is not 
possible to graph the cover ratio of each ILTR operation over time. Instead, Figure 8 shows 
the cumulative amount of liquidity allocated by collateral type. As a result of the new variable 
supply function in the ILTRs, an increased amount of liquidity allocated should signal 
systemic instability.  
Figure 8: Cumulative Amount Allocated to Bidders in the Second Iteration 
 
Source: Bank of England n.d.a. 
1142
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 20 ---
As an example, Figure 9 shows the allocation percentages in individual auctions across the 
collateral sets during the COVID crisis in 2020. In February and March of that year, the 
amount of ILTR operations allocated against bids using the least liquid set of collateral 
clearly demonstrates the market stress faced by participants at that time.  
Figure 9: Allocation during 2020 across Collateral Sets 
 
Source: Bank of England n.d.a. 
9. Individual Participation Limits: The Bank of England initially limited the ov erall 
size of participant bids but removed this restriction along with the fixed supply of 
liquidity.  
The Bank did not initially place a limit on the number of bids that a counterparty could 
submit during an auction. However, the combined bids could not e xceed 30% of the total 
funds offered. The Bank allowed a minimum bid of GBP 5 million, and higher bids at GBP 1 
million increments (Bank of England 2010b).  
Along with other changes, the second iteration of the ILTRs removed the maximum limits on 
bid size since the amount of liquidity being offered was no longer limited. However, the 
minimum bid and minimum bid increments remained at GBP 5 million and GBP 1 million, 
respectively (Bank of England 2014a). 
1143
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
10. Rate Charged on Operations: ILTR operations utilized a uniform pricing structure, 
where successful bidders paid the lowest accepted spread. 
The ILTR operations used a uniform pricing structure, in which successf ul bidders paid the 
clearing spread applicable to each set of collateral (Bank of England 2010b) . Bidders 
expressed their offers as a spread above the Bank Rate (in whole basis points)(Fisher, Frost, 
and Weeken 2011). The Bank calculated the interest charg ed on the ILTRs on a daily basis, 
using the sum of the Bank Rate at the close of the business day plus the applicable clearing 
spread for the set of collateral used in the operation. The total interest due for an ILTR 
drawing was the sum of those daily accruals (Bank of England 2010b). 
The Bank noted in its position paper describing the operations that indexing the operations 
to the Bank Rate allow ed it to avoid exposure to market fluctuations and free d banks from 
projecting the future path of interest rate s (Bank of England 2010a). Previously, the ELTRs 
did not index their rates to the Bank Rate, which created this exposure to market risk (Fisher, 
Frost, and Weeken 2011) . (See Figure 10 for clearing spreads during the first iteration of 
ILTRs, with spreads on the wider collateral significantly higher for the six-month ILTRs.) 
Figure 10: Clearing Spreads for the First Iteration of the ILTRs  
 
Source: Bank of England n.d.b. 
In the second iteration of the ILTRs, the Bank introduced a refinement of the minimum 
spread, which initially was zero for all collateral pools (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011). The 
new rule allowed minimum spreads to be zero basis points for Level A collateral, five basis 
points for Level B, and 15 basis points for Level C collateral (Bank of England 2014a) . The 
clearing spreads on the ILTRs have only rarely exceeded these minima. (See Figure 11 for a 
depiction of clearing spreads over time. Note that the high clearing spreads in 2020 occurred 
1144
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 22 ---
the week before and the day after the UK government went into lockdown due to the COVID-
19 pandemic.) 
Figure 11: Clearing Spreads on Second Iteration of the ILTRs 
 
Source: Bank of England n.d.a. 
11. Eligible Collateral: The ILTR operations initially utilized two sets of eligible 
collateral, but the second iteration added a third set. 
First Iteration 
 From creation until June 2014, the ILTRs had two sets of eligible collateral: “narrow” and 
“wider” (Bank of England 2010b) . The narrow set of collateral contained the securities 
usually eligible for the Bank’s short -term repo operations, which were the hi ghest quality 
sovereign securities. The wider set included a larger range of high -quality, but less -liquid 
debt securities (Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015) . (See Appendix A for a full list of eligible 
collateral at creation.)  
All of the collateral used for ILTRs had to have underlying cash assets, not synthetic; in other 
words, they could not be backed by derivatives positions. Covered bonds and asset -backed 
securities issued by —or containing assets originated by —the counterparty were not 
eligible. Eligible collateral could be denominated in sterling, euro, US dollars, Australian 
dollars, Canadian dollars, Swedish krona, Swiss francs , or Japanese yen (Bank of England 
2010b). 
The Bank applied the same haircuts to the narrow set of eligible collateral that it uses for the 
Bank’s regular set of short-term repo operations. For securities in the wider set of collateral, 
1145
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
the Bank varied haircuts depending on their interest rates, maturity lengths, and type of 
collateral pledged (Bank of England 2010b).  
Securities denominated in foreign currencies received an additional haircut of six percentage 
points, with yen-denominated securities getting an additional two-percentage-point haircut. 
Collateral without an observable market price received a haircut add -on of five pe rcentage 
points, and the Bank could apply an unspecified haircut to corporate bonds that were not 
well diversified (Bank of England 2010b). (See Appendix B for the full haircut schedule at the 
start of the ILTRs.) 
Second Iteration  
Along with the other adj ustments the Bank made to the ILTRs in 2014, the Bank expanded 
the eligible sets of collateral, changed their terminology, and standardized the sets across 
facilities. The narrow set of collateral became Level A, comprised of high -quality and highly 
liquid sovereign securities. The wider set became Level B and consisted of high-quality liquid 
collateral such as sovereign, supranational, mortgage, and corporate bonds. In a new 
addition, the Bank created Level C, which included less -liquid securitizations, ow n-name 
securities and portfolios of loans (Bank of England 2014a).7  
Collateral used in ILTR operations faced the standard Sterling Monetary Framework haircuts 
used in other Bank of England operations (Bank of England 2014a).8 These haircuts varied 
depending on type of security, maturity of the securities, and whether the security paid a 
coupon. There continued to be additional haircuts for currency volatility, inability to observe 
a market price, and poorly diversified portfol ios of corporate bonds. Since own -name 
covered bonds became eligible in the second iteration, they received an additional haircut of 
five percentage points (Bank of England 2014c). 
The Bank encouraged participants to pre -position their collateral with the Bank ahead of 
ILTR operations, with the pre -positioning of Level C collateral required (Bank of England 
2014a).  
12. Maturity: Initially, the Bank offered both three - and six-month maturities on its 
operations but simplified this to only six-month maturities in 2014. 
For the first iteration of the ILTRs, the Bank offered two ILTRs with three-month maturities 
and one six -month ILTR in each calendar quarter (Bank of England 2010b) . Regulatory 
liquidity requirements only recognized funding with more than three mon ths of remaining 
maturity, which removed the majority of ILTR funds from consideration (Winters 2012). 
Along with the other changes made in 2014, the Bank simplified the ILTRs to provide lending 
 
7 A full list of eligible securities can be found at https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/summary -
collateral-eligible-banks-operations.  
8 These standard haircuts can be found at https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/summary -haircuts-securities-
eligible-banks-lending-operations. 
1146
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 24 ---
only on six -month terms (Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015) . Accor ding to the Bank, this 
adjustment allowed for “greater certainty of committed funding” (Bank of England 2013).  
13. Other Conditions: There did not appear to be any notable additional conditions 
attached to liquidity support. 
Research did not determine other conditions involved in the ILTR operations. 
14. Impact on Monetary Policy Transmission: The Bank lent sterling cash in ILTR 
auctions, leading to an impact on the supply of reserves in circulation. 
Since the ILTRs were lending sterling cash against eligible coll ateral, they had an impact on 
the supply of reserves to the banking system (Winters 2012). 
By indexing the auction interest rates paid by bidders to the Bank Rate, the Bank and the 
participants avoided interest -rate risk that could be disruptive to their o perations. 
Additionally, the Bank conducted comprehensive risk management and monitoring of 
collateral used in the operations (including appropriate haircuts) in order to minimize losses 
(Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015). (See Figure 12 for an overview of the impacts of central bank 
operations depending on the asset involved in the repo agreement.) 
Figure 12: Impact of Operations on a Central Bank 
 Repo of government bonds Repo of private-sector assets 
Central bank income  Positive when backing banknotes 
and unremunerated reserves; 
none when backing renumerated 
reserves 
Positive when backing banknotes 
and unremunerated reserves; 
potentially positive backing 
remunerated reserves depending 
on the price charge on collateral  
Market risk Small Modest, depending on collateral 
Credit risk None Modest, depending on collateral 
Churn risk High, increases as term of repo 
decreases 
High, increases as term of repo 
decreases 
Central bank liquidity High Depending on the liquidity of the 
underlying asset 
Source: Rule 2015. 
15. Other Options: The Winters Review suggested that the Bank merge the ILTRs with 
the Extended Collateral Term Repo (ECTR), which the Bank decided not to do. 
In 2012, the Bank of England released the Winters Review, which assessed the Bank of 
England’s liquidity provision facilities within the context of the Global Financial Crisis. The 
report offered recommendations to the Bank on how to improve its facilities  to prepare for 
the next crisis. One of these recommendations was to merge the ILTR operations with the 
Extended Collateral Term Repo (ECTR), which is a contingency liquidity facility that can be 
activated in times of market-wide stress. The ECTRs accepted a much wider set of collateral 
1147
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
than the ILTRs such as “illiquid but transferrable securities” and “own -name securities and 
loans,” but at a high penalty rate (Winters 2012). On the other hand, the ILTR facility typically 
accepted collateral that could also be financed on the private market. This had the potential 
to cause serious dislocations due to uncertainty surrounding contingent activation of the 
ECTRs and the difference in pricing and collateral (Winters 2012) . The Winters Review 
advised this combina tion as it would allow the Bank of England to have a regular auction 
facility that allowed banks to access term funding against a wider set of collateral (Bank of 
England 2013). 
The Bank of England stated in 2013 that, while it agreed with the “underlying objective” of 
this recommendation by the Winters Review, it would not be merging the ILTRs and ECTRs 
(Bank of England 2013). Instead, the Bank created the second iteration of the ILTRs, which 
greatly expanded the eligible set of collateral, extended the term to six months, provided for 
full allotments, and recalibrated to yield lower prices. It retained the ECTR program in order 
to keep an expansive contingent facility in case of a crisis but  changed its name to the 
Contingent Term Repo Facility (Bank of England 2013). 
16. International Coordination: The Bank referred to the ILTR design as “a world first 
in central banking.” 
There does not appear to have been any international coordination in designing the ILTRs. 
In fact, a Deputy Governor of the Bank of England  referred to the ILTRs as: “A world first in 
central banking…potentially a major step forward in practical policies to support financial 
stability” (Klemperer 2018). 
The academic responsible for creating the auction format utilized in the ILTRs, Dr. Paul 
Klemperer, did present a similar proposal to the US Treasury for its Troubled Asset Relief 
Program (TARP), along with Dr. Paul Milgrom. The Treasury intended to use elements of the 
product-mix auction for TARP, but Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson dropped th is plan in 
November 2008 (Klemperer 2018). 
17. Communication: The Bank of England released market notices announcing the 
auction schedule and changes to the program, as well as communicating directly 
with counterparties to educate them on the auction design. 
The Bank of England released market notices announcing the auction schedule, as well as 
minor changes. The Bank also released a position paper (2010a) explaining the ILTRs, as 
well as another paper (2013) to announce the changes in the second iteration to the ILTRs. 
Increased usage of ILTR operations during the EU Referendum in 2016 led one auction above 
the minimum rate (a rarity), which meant that some participants did not receive any funds. 
In response, the Bank held educative conference calls with counte rparties to discuss how 
bidding behaviors interact with the ILTR auction design (Independent Evaluation Office 
2018).  
1148
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 26 ---
18. Disclosure: The Bank released aggregated results of the auctions on the day that 
they occurred. 
The Bank released the results of the operations ten minutes after bidding closed. These 
public results included aggregate data on the total amount bid, the amount allocated, the 
stop-out spread, and the cover ratio. The results reported these statistics fo r each collateral 
set (Bank of England 2010b). 
19. Stigma Strategy: The Bank did not believe that the ILTR operations suffered from 
stigma, as a result of their structure and uniform pricing. 
The Winters Review (2012) found little evidence that the ILTR operat ions suffered from 
stigma. In announcing the second iteration of the ILTRs, the Bank of England agreed with 
that conclusion (Bank of England 2013).  
The Bank does not believe that the effectiveness of its market-wide facilities is materially 
impaired by stigma … But, to the extent that liquidity insurance is focused on risks more 
extreme than those encountered in normal market conditions, complete elimination of 
stigma in all cases would be unrealistic.  
An evaluation of the Bank’s liquidity operations in 2018 determined that the second iteration 
of the ILTRs had little-reported stigma issues (Independent Evaluation Office 2018).  
The ILTR operations utilize a uniform pricing structure, where all successful bidders pay the 
lowest accepted price (the clearing  spread). This style of pricing largely removes the 
incentive for bidders to “game” the auctions or attempt to predict other bidders’ choices 
(Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011) . This, paired with the anonymous disclosure of results, 
lessened the risk of stig ma, since all participants paid the same amount without their true 
bids and preferences revealed to the market. 
20. Exit Strategy: ILTR operations are a permanent facility in the Sterling Monetary 
Framework. 
The Bank of England established ILTR operations as a permanent standing facility to provide 
liquidity support to the banking sector (Bank of England 2010a) . As a result of the auction 
design, a lower proportion of available funds are lent against less -liquid collateral in times 
of relative stability (Bank of England 2010b) . As of 2021, the Bank still conducted weekly 
ILTRs. 
  
1149
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 27 ---
References and Key Program Documents 
Documents cited in the text are introduced with a parenthetical author -date citation. 
Documents that are relevant to this case but have not been cit ed in text do not include this 
parenthetical reference. 
Program Summaries 
(Bank of England n.d.a) Bank of England. n.d.a. “Indexed Long-Term Repo OMOs by 
Operation.” 
ILTR results from the second iteration. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indexed-long-term-repo-omos-operation 
(Bank of England n.d.b) Bank of England. n.d.b. “Indexed Long-Term Repo OMOs by 
Operation (Jun-10 - Jan-14).” 
ILTR results from the first iteration. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indexed-long-term-repo-omos-operation-jun-10-jan-14 
(Churm et al 2012) Churm, Rohan, Radia, Amar, Leake, Jeremy, Srinivasan, Sylaja, Whisker, 
Richard. 2012. “The Funding for Lending Scheme.”  
Quarterly bulletin describing the launch of the Funding for Lending Scheme. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/funding-lending-scheme 
(Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011) Fisher, Paul, Tarkus Frost, and Olaf Weeken. 2011. 
“Pricing Central Bank Liquidity through Product-Mix Auctions – the First Anniversary of 
the Bank of England’s Indexed Long-Term Repo Operations.” Bank of England. 
Paper explaining the product-mix auction design used by the ILTRs. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/pricing-central-bank-liquidity-through-product-mix-
auctions-first-anniversary-bank-englands 
Implementation Documents 
(Bank of England 2008a) Bank of England. 2008a. “The Framework For the Bank of 
England’s Operations in the Sterling Money Markets.” 
Documentation of terms and conditions for participation in the Bank’s Sterling Monetary 
Framework. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/framework-bank-englands-operations-sterling-money-
markets 
(Bank of England 2008b) Bank of England. 2008b. “Bank of England Market Notice: 
Extended Collateral Long-Term Repo Operations (10/03/08).” October 3, 2008. 
Extension of weekly ELTR until at least November 18, 2008, while expanding the eligible 
collateral set. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-england-market-notice-extended-collateral-long-
term-repo-operations-100308 
1150
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 28 ---
(Bank of England 2010a) Bank of England. 2010a. “Bank of England Position-Paper: 
Proposed Framework for Permanent Long-Term Repo Operations.” March 23, 2010. 
Position paper establishing the proposed framework for the ILTRs. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-england-position-paper-proposed-framework-
permanent-long-term-repo-operations 
(Bank of England 2010b) Bank of England. 2010b. “Bank of England Market Notice: 
Indexed Long-Term Repo Operations; US Dollar Repo Operations.” May 26, 2010. 
Initial market notice detailing the ILTRs. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-england-market-notice-indexed-long-term-repo-
operations-us-dollar-repo-operations 
(Bank of England 2014a) Bank of England. 2014a. “Indexed Long-Term Repo Operations 
and Contingent Term Repo Facility.” January 16, 2014. 
Market notice for the second iteration of the ILTRs with a third set of collateral. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indexed-long-term-repo-operations-and-contingent-
term-repo-facility 
(Bank of England 2014b) Bank of England. 2014b. “Record of the Financial Policy 
Committee Meeting 26 September 2014.” October 10, 2014. 
Financial Policy Committee Meeting notes on the potential for increased ILTR operations 
around the Scotland referendum. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/record-financial-policy-committee-meeting-26-
september-2014 
(Bank of England 2014c) Bank of England. 2014c. “Summary of Haircuts for Securities 
Eligible for the Bank’s Lending Operations.” November 13, 2014. 
Schedule of haircuts on securities eligible for the Bank of England’s facilities. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/summary-haircuts-securities-eligible-banks-lending-
operations 
(Bank of England 2016) Bank of England. 2016. “Record of Financial Policy Committee 
Meeting Held on 23 March 2016.” April 5, 2016. 
Financial Policy Committee Meeting notes about the Bank’s reaction to the upcoming EU 
Referendum. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/record-financial-policy-committee-meeting-held-23-
march-2016 
(Bank of England 2019a) Bank of England. 2019a. “Extension of Weekly Indexed Long-
Term Repo Operations.” April 2, 2019. 
Market notice announcing the extension of weekly ILTRs until the end of June 2019. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/extension-weekly-indexed-long-term-repo-operations 
(Bank of England 2019b) Bank of England. 2019b. “Extension of Weekly Indexed Long-
Term Repo Operations - Market Notice October 2019.” October 1, 2019. 
Market notice making the ILTRs weekly on an indefinite basis. 
1151
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 29 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/extension-weekly-indexed-long-term-repo-operations-
market-notice-october-2019 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(HMT, BOE, FSA 2006) HM Treasury, Bank of England, and Financial Services Authority 
(HMT, BOE, FSA). 2006. “Memorandum of Understanding between HM Treasury, the Bank 
of England and the Financial Services Authority.” 
Memorandum of understanding establishing the financial stability responsibilities of British 
government agencies. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/memorandum-understanding-between-hm-treasury-
bank-england-and-financial-services-authority 
Media Stories 
(The Economist 2012) The Economist. 2012. “A Golden Age of Micro,” October 19, 2012. 
Article that contains a quote regarding the ILTR operations. 
https://www.economist.com/free-exchange/2012/10/19/a-golden-age-of-micro 
Reports/Assessments 
(Bank of England 2008c) Bank of England. 2008c. “The Development of the Bank of 
England’s Market Operations.” 
Report from the Bank of England detailing its market operations and future changes that 
might be implemented. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/development-bank-englands-market-operations 
(Bank of England 2013) Bank of England. 2013. “Liquidity Insurance at the Bank of 
England: Developments in the Sterling Monetary Framework.” 
Paper that discusses the changes to the ILTRs and the ECTRs. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/liquidity-insurance-bank-england-developments-
sterling-monetary-framework 
(Frost, Govier, and Horn 2015) Frost, Tarkus, Nick Govier, and Tom Horn. 2015. 
“Innovations in the Bank’s Provision of Liquidity Insurance via Indexed Long-Term Repo 
(ILTR) Operations.” Bank of England. 
Report detailing the successor facility to ELTR. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/innovations-banks-provision-liquidity-insurance-
indexed-long-term-repo-iltr-operations 
(Independent Evaluation Office 2018) Independent Evaluation Office. 2018. “Evaluation of 
the Bank of England’s Approach to Providing Sterling Liquidity.” Bank of England. 
Paper evaluating the second iteration of the ILTRs in 2018, as well as the governance of the 
Bank’s facilities. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/evaluation-bank-englands-approach-providing-sterling-
liquidity 
1152
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 30 ---
(Winters 2012) Winters, Bill. 2012. “Review of the Bank of England’s Framework for 
Providing Liquidity to the Banking System.” Bank of England. 
Report presented to the Court of the Bank of England on the BoE operations to provide 
liquidity during the Global Financial Crisis. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/review-bank-englands-framework-providing-liquidity-
banking-system 
Key Academic Papers 
(Fulmer 2022a) Fulmer, Sean. 2022a. “United Kingdom: Extended Collateral Term Repo 
Facility.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. 
YPFS case study on the Bank of England’s contingent liquidity facility. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/51 
(Fulmer 2022b) Fulmer, Sean. 2022b. “United Kingdom: Extended-Collateral Long-Term 
Repo.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. 
YPFS case study on the ELTR facility from the Bank of England. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/50 
(Klemperer 2018) Klemperer, Paul. 2018. “Product-Mix Auctions.” Nuffield College 
Working Paper 2018-W07. 
Paper describing how product-mix auctions function written by their inventor. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/product-mix-auctions 
(Rahman 2017) Rahman, Arshadur. 2017. “Islamic Banks and Central Banking.” Bank of 
England Quarterly Bulletin, no. Q3: 156–69. 
Paper on Islamic banking which includes a discussion of the ILTRs not being Shari’ah 
compliant. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/islamic-banks-and-central-banking 
(Rule 2015) Rule, Garreth. 2015. “Understanding the Central Bank Balance Sheet.” 
Handbook. Centre for Central Banking Studies. Bank of England. 
Paper detailing the balance sheet of the Bank of England and the risks associated with repo 
agreements. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/understanding-central-bank-balance-sheet 
 
  
1153
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 31 ---
Appendixes 
Appendix A: Wider Set of Collateral at the Creation of the ILTR Operations 
Type of Collateral Rating 
Bonds issued by G10 sovereigns Aa3/AA- or higher 
Bonds issued by G10 government agencies explicitly guaranteed by national 
governments 
AAA 
Conventional debt security issues of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal 
Home Loan Banks system 
AAA 
The most senior tranches of UK and Dutch Prime Residential mortgage-backed 
securities (RMBS); un-listed RMBS not eligible 
AAA 
UK, German, French, and Spanish regulated covered bonds with an issue size 
greater than £1 billion or €1 billion; underlying assets may be UK or EEA social 
housing loans, public-sector debt, or prime residential mortgages 
AAA 
The most senior tranches of UK, US, and EEA asse t-backed securities (ABS) 
backed by credit cards issued to prime borrowers; un-listed ABS not eligible 
AAA 
The most senior tranches of UK, US, and EEA prime ABS backed by auto loans 
and certain equipment leases; un-listed ABS not eligible 
AAA 
The most senior tranches of UK, US, and EEA prime ABS backed by student and 
consumer loans; un-listed ABS not eligible 
AAA 
Bank and building society debt guaranteed under HM Government’s Credit 
Guarantee Scheme for bank debt 
n/a 
Senior bank debt that is guaranteed under certain non -UK sovereign bank 
debt-guarantee schemes 
n/a 
Portfolios of senior corporate bonds and commercial paper issued by non -
financial companies in the UK, US, and EEA; diversification requirement that 
no more than 10% of the total value of the portfolio may be from one issuer 
A3/A- (corporate 
bonds) 
A2/P2/F2 
(commercial paper) 
Source: Bank of England 2010b. 
1154
United Kingdom Fulmer

--- Page 32 ---
Appendix B: Initial Haircuts on Wider Collateral Set during the First Iteration 
 
Source: Bank of England 2010b. 
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
1155
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2