--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 2 
2022 
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale School of Management 
Sean Fulmer 
Yale School of Management 
Greg Feldberg 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Wiggins, Rosalind Z.; Fulmer, Sean; Feldberg, Greg; and Metrick, Andrew (2022) "Broad-Based Emergency 
Liquidity Programs," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 2, 86-178. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1293 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/3 
This Survey is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This survey is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol4/iss2/3

--- Page 3 ---
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs1 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins,2 Sean Fulmer,3 Greg Feldberg,4 and Andrew Metrick5, 6 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Survey 
July 15, 2022; Revised February 2, 2023 
Abstract 
In this paper , we analyze broad -based emergency liquidity  (BBEL) programs. Our main 
purpose is to assist policymakers who are considering establishing a BBEL  program in 
designing the most effective program possible as efficiently as possible. Our insights are 
derived from 33 case studies the Yale Program on Financial Stability produced and existing 
literature on the topic.  
Liquidity provision is a long -established mandate of central banks and was a function that 
private entities  performed even before the establishment o f central banks. We survey a 
sampling of cases from the 19 th through 21 st centuries, drawn from 10 countries and 
regions, to distill what elements make for effective BBEL  programs and which factors can 
jeopardize a program’s effectiveness.  
In our review of these cases, we identified five major themes: ( 1) early deployment of 
credible BBEL assistance in the acute phase of a crisis can serve to arrest or moderate the 
crisis and stop it from evolving into an extended chronic phase ; (2) relying on existing 
authorities, programs, or administrative frameworks enables the efficient design and 
deployment of BBEL programs ; (3) if the liquidity constraint persists, we often see the use 
of multiple BBEL programs to provide wide access to a broad range of participants; (4) other 
interventions also commonly employed alongside BBEL  programs include credit and 
account guarantees in the acute phase  and asset purchases, recapitalizations, and loan 
guarantees in the chronic phase ; and (5) in all phases, clear communication is a valuable 
policy tool to drive utilization, and positive announcement effects are possible.  
Keywords: emergency liquidity, lender of last resort, liquidity support, moral hazard, 
penalty rate, solvency, stigma   
 
1 This survey explores part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
case studies considering broad -based emergency liquidity programs from various time periods and 
jurisdictions. Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-offinancial-crises/. 
2 Director, Global Financial Crises Project, and Lecturer in Management, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
3 Senior Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
4 Research Scholar and Director of Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
5 Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of Management. 
6 The authors thank Ben jamin Hoffner and Carey Mott , Research Associates, Y PFS, for their very helpful 
research assistance on this survey. 
86

--- Page 4 ---
Introductory Note: This survey is an analysis of important considerations for policymakers 
seeking to establish a broad-based emergency liquidity (BBEL) program. It is based on insights 
derived from case studies of 33 specific BBEL programs the Yale Program on Financial Stability 
(YPFS) has completed and from the existing literature on the topic. While this survey can help 
inform a decision about whether to establish a BBEL program, our main purpose is to assist 
policymakers who have already made that decision in designing the most effective program 
possible. In analyzing the programs that are the focus of this survey, we use a color -coded 
system to highlight certain particularly noteworthy design features. 
Color Meaning 
BLUE – INTERESTING A design feature that is interesting and that 
policymakers may want to consider. 
Typically, this determination is based on the 
observation that the design feature involves 
a unique and potentially promising way of 
addressing a challenge common to this type 
of program that may not be obvious. Less 
commonly, empirical evidence or a 
consensus will indicate that the design 
feature was effective in this context, in 
which case we will describe that evidence or 
consensus.  
YELLOW – CAUTION INDICATED A design feature that policymakers should 
exercise caution in considering. Typically, 
this determination is based on the 
observation that the designers of the 
feature later made significant changes with 
the intention of improving the program. 
Less commonly , empirical evidence or a 
consensus will indicate that the design 
feature was ineffective in this context, in 
which case we will describe that evidence or 
consensus.  
FOOTNOTE IN ITALICS Where the reason that a given design 
feature has been highlighted is not apparent 
from the text, it is accompanied by an 
italicized footnote that explains why we 
chose to highlight it. Where necessary, these 
footnotes will be used to identify any 
considerations that should be kept in mind 
when thinking about the feature. 
This highlighting is not intended to be dispositive. The fact that a design feature is not 
highlighted or is highlighted yellow does not mean that it should not be considered or that it 
will never be effective under any circumstances. Similarly, the fact t hat a design feature is 
87
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
not highlighted or is highlighted blue does not mean that it should always be considered or 
will be effective under all circumstances. The highlighting is our subjective attempt to guide 
readers toward certain design features that ( 1) may not be obvious but are worth 
considering or (2) require caution. 
  
88
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 6 ---
Introduction 
A primary role for central banks is to act as a “lender of last resort” (LOLR). This role is almost 
as old as central banking itself. In the 19th century, the Bank of England (BoE) was the most 
important LOLR in the world, and leading economic thinkers of the time debated its policies 
for emergency lending. Advice for the BoE as a LOLR was first accorded canonical status in 
Thornton (1802) and given its most popular formulation by Bagehot (1873), whose dictum 
instructs central bankers facing a financial panic to lend freel y, upon good collateral, at a 
penalty rate. While debates as to some nuances are still active, Bagehot’s dictum has largely 
survived intact into the 21st century and served as a guiding principle for the policy response 
to the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–2009 (GFC). In the wake of that  crisis, Tucker (2014) 
provides a modern summary of the dictum as “lend freely and early to sound firms against 
good collateral at a premium to the risk-free rate of interest.” Although much has changed in 
150 years, aspects of Bagehot’s guidance are now legally enshrined in the governing laws of 
many central banks. 
The importance of the LOLR function has spurred a large literature by scholars and 
practitioners. Bignon, Flandreau, and Ugolini (2012) examines the development of the LOLR 
function and its original principles in the 19th century. Calomiris, Flandreau, and Laeven  
(2016) expands this history geographically and into the 20th century , surveying a number 
of central banks. Carlson, Duygan-Bump, and Nel son (2015) surveys in detail  the Federal 
Reserve System’s operations as LOLR during the Global Financial Crisis and the lessons to be 
learned; Plenderleith (2012) does the same for the Bank of England’s performance, and Praet 
(2016) provides a similar examination of the European Central Bank (ECB) actions. Tucker 
(2014) more generally addresses a number of technical and governance challenges central 
banks faced during the GFC and reconsiders how Bagehot applies to the modern LOLR.  
In this paper, we are not trying to duplicate these efforts. Instead, we are focused on the “key 
design decisions” (KDDs) necessary for broad-based LOLR programs during financial crises. 
Based on the close study of 33 specific programs, we identify specific design features that 
appear interesting or cautionary, and we attempt to add some detail and nuance to the 
Bagehot principles.  
First, some definitions.  We restrict our study to broad-based emergency liquidity (BBEL) 
programs: “broad -based” because such interventions are targeted to a wide range of 
financial institutions, and “emergency” because they are introduced during periods of 
systemwide stress. To the extent that lending is na rrowly targeted toward one (or a few) 
institutions, we define such programs as “ad hoc emergency liquidity” and will survey them 
in a different series of case studies . To the extent that the lending is targeted to markets 
rather than institutions, we define those programs as “market liquidity” or “market support,” 
surveyed in Rhee et al. (2020) and Rhee et al.  (2022), respectively. To the extent that the 
lending targets a liquidity shortage in a foreign currency, we will consider those programs 
in a future “foreign currency swaps” survey. 
The restriction to “emergency” programs is also important. Most central banks have standing 
nonemergency mechanisms to lend to their member institutions, generally banks, often 
89
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
through a formal discount window  (DW). Early in a crisis, the expanded usage of these 
windows may first bring attention to liquidity conce rns. For the purposes of this survey, 
however, we focus on cases where either a program is entirely new, or policymakers have at 
least introduced an explicit change in such standing programs along with (internal or 
external) recognition of systemwide stress.  
We do not consider our analysis bound by Bagehot’s dictum, or by its modern nuances.  It 
seems high time to take a fresh look at all aspects of emergency lending.  But one Bagehot 
debate we find  worthy of discussion right at the beginning: the issue of w hether lending 
should be extended only to “solvent” firms. Some of the modern restatements of Bagehot’s 
dictum have added this solvency (or “soundness”) requirement , and some countries have 
even enshrined it in law. Yet Bagehot himself never mentions it in Lombard Street; his focus 
is entirely on the collateral that the Bank of England should lend against.  In most financial 
crises, some firms are so far gone that the authorities face an immediate decision—rescue or 
let fail—a question that we save for our l ater ad hoc liquidity survey. But for the broader 
population of firms whose asset values are impaired by temporarily depressed prices, 
defining what solvency means in the midst of the panic  would be difficult and even 
counterproductive for authorities to attempt.  
To illustrate the challenge, it is helpful to think of financial crises and policy responses as 
having two different phases, “acute” and “chronic .” In the initial acute phase, the financial 
system has an obvious liquidity problem —runs on banks or breakdowns in interbank 
markets are easy to spot —but the underlying solvency of banks is difficult to judge in the 
heat of that moment.  The asset side of financial institutions’ balance sheets may be 
impossible to value, and the collapse on the liability side can lead them to sell these assets at 
temporarily depressed prices. During this acute phase, policy responses need to be fast and 
emphasize protection of the fragile liabilities.  That protection can be in the form of 
emergency lending, liabili ty guarantees, or some combination of the two. To achieve these 
goals, policy should be targeted to reassure depositors and other short-term bank creditors 
that bank liabilities are safe.  The goal in this phase is to arrest runs and prevent fire sales.  
Any strict solvency condition is doomed to failure —there is simply no time to make such 
judgments. 
In the later chronic phase, the immediate liquidity pressures have eased , often because of 
effective BBEL programs,  but any underlying solvency problems remain.  In the traditional 
banking sector, a chronic phase is characterized by low capital levels that hold back long -
term lending. As such, policies during the chronic phase should be targeted to influence the 
behavior of the banks themselves. Effective policies need to fix the solvency problem directly. 
Solvency is ultimately an equity problem and cannot be solved  simply by lending.  To fix 
solvency problems, policymakers typically need to deploy fiscal tools, either directly through 
capital injections or indirectly through the purchase and sale of bank assets. We survey these 
types of interventions in Rhee et al. (2022) and McNamara et al. (2022), respectively.  
All the BBEL programs in this surv ey were created or activated during an acute phase: 
indeed, introduction during the acute phase is a defining feature of an “emergency” program. 
BBEL programs are often the first response to a crisis because they can be straightforward 
90
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 8 ---
adjustments to standing facilities and implemented under already existing authority . As a 
crisis evolves into an extended chronic phase, the authorities may adjust  or augment their 
BBEL programs , for example, by broadening collateral eligibility , expanding the class of 
eligible participants, or increasing the size of auctions.  
Figure 1 lists these 33 cases, which cover 10 countries and regions and are drawn from crises 
in the 19th, 20th, and 21 st centuries. In some of the earlier crises, the LOLR was a private 
institution or consortium, and not a government entity. We will generally refer to “LOLR” 
unless the context calls for using a specific identifier such as “central bank” or “private LOLR.” 
  
91
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1: Case Studies, Abbreviated Names, and Type of Lender of Last Resort (LOLR) 
Case name Short-form  
case name 
Type of LOLR 
(a) Reference 
Canada: Contingent Term Repo Facility  Canada CT Repo  CB (Nunn 2022) 
Canada: Private-Sector Term Purchase and Resale Agreements Canada Term PRA-PS CB (Sankar 2022a) 
Canada: Term Loan Facility  Canada TLF CB (Sankar 2022b)  
Canada: Term Purchase and Resale Agreement Facility Canada Term PRA  CB (Sankar 2022c) 
European Central Bank: Fine-Tuning Operations ECB FTOs CB (Runkel 2022a) 
European Central Bank: Term Refinancing Operations ECB TROs CB (Runkel 2022b) 
Greece: Emergency Liquidity Assistance Greece ELA CB (Runkel 2022c) 
Hong Kong: Private Emergency Loans, 1965 Hong Kong 1965 P LOLR/FA (b) (Hoffner 2022a) 
Hong Kong: Temporary Liquidity Measures, 2008 Hong Kong 2008 CB (Hoffner 2022b) 
Hungary: Liquidity Scheme, 2009–2013 Hungary Liquidity  FA/CB (c) (Mott and 
Buchholtz 2022) 
Norway: Covered Bond Swap Program Norway Covered 
Bond 
FA/CB (d) (Fulmer 2022b) 
Russia: Central Bank Bonds, 1998 Russia OBR CB (Hoffner 2022c) 
Russia: Lombard and Overnight Loans, 1998 Russia LO CB (Hoffner 2022d) 
Thailand: Financial Institutions Development Fund Liquidity 
Support 
Thailand FIDF CB/OGA (e) (Runkel 2022d) 
United Kingdom: Bank of England Lending during the Panic of 
1825 
UK BoE 1825 P LOLR (f) (Fulmer 2022c) 
United Kingdom: Bank of England Lending during the Panic of 
1866 
UK BoE 1866 P LOLR (f) (Fulmer 2022d) 
United Kingdom: Discount Window Facility UK DWF  CB (Fulmer 2022e) 
United Kingdom: Extended-Collateral Long-Term Repo  UK ELTR CB (Fulmer 2022g) 
United Kingdom: Extended Collateral Term Repo Facility  UK ECTR/CTRF CB (Fulmer 2022f) 
United Kingdom: Indexed Long-Term Repo UK ILTR CB (Fulmer 2022h) 
United States: Aldrich-Vreeland Emergency Currency during 
the Crisis of 1914 
US Aldrich-Vreeland FA (Fulmer 2022i) 
United States: Federal Home Loan Bank Advances, 1932–1941 US FHLB 1932–1941 OGA (Leonard 2022a) 
United States: Federal Home Loan Bank Advances, 2007–2009 US FHLB GFC OGA (Leonard 2022b) 
United States: New York Clearing House, the Crisis of 1893 US NYCH 1893 P LOLR (Leonard 2022c) 
United States: New York Clearing House, the Crisis of 1914 US NYCH 1914 P LOLR (Fulmer 2022j) 
United States: New York Clearing House, the Panic of 1873 US NYCH 1873 P LOLR (Fulmer 2022k) 
United States: New York Clearing House, the Panic of 1884 US NYCH 1884 P LOLR (Hoffner 2022e) 
United States: New York Clearing House, the Panic of 1890 US NYCH 1890 P LOLR (Hoffner 2022f) 
United States: New York Clearing House, the Panic of 1907 US NYCH 1907 P LOLR (Runkel 2022e) 
United States: Reconstruction Finance Corporation Emergency 
Lending to Financial Institutions, 1932–1933 
US RFC 1932–1933 OGA (Leonard 2022d) 
United States: Term Auction Facility US TAF CB (Runkel 2022f) 
United States: Y2K Special Liquidity Facility  US Y2K SLF CB (Leonard 2022e) 
United States: Y2K Standby Financing Facility  US Y2K SFF CB (Leonard 2022f) 
(a) CB = central bank. P LOLR= private LOLR, refers to a nongovernmental entity that functions as a lender of last resort. FA = fiscal 
authority; refers to a government fiscal authority such as a Ministry of Finance or Treasury. OGA = other governmental agency; refers to 
a government agency other than the central bank or fiscal authority. 
(b) Two large private banks acted as private LOLRs and as a conduit for funding from the Hong Kong government.  
(c) For the Hungarian Liquidity Scheme, the managing authority was the Ministry of Finance, which looked to the central bank and the 
Hungarian Financial Supervisory Authority to perform many of the administrative duties and make recommendations. 
(d) The central bank recommended the Covered Bond Swap Program to the Ministry of Finance and managed the program on behalf of the 
ministry.  
(e) A royal decree in 1985 created the Financial Institutions Development Fund (FIDF) as a legally distinct entity within the Bank of 
Thailand (BOT) to support troubled institutions. Regardless of its distinct legal status, the FIDF was controlled by the BOT. 
(f) In 1825 and 1866, the Bank of England operated as a private LOLR, as it was not yet a central bank. In 1866, as in 1847 and 1857, the 
government authorized the BoE to exceed its legal limit on unbacked note issuance to alleviate liquidity strains. 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
92
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 10 ---
The main body of this paper discusses the key design decisions necessary to implement these 
programs. Broadly speaking, designers must choose all the lending terms: rates (and how to 
set them), maturities, eligible counterparties, limits on lending to any specific counterparty, 
collateral rules, and everything else necessary for originating a loan. In making each of these 
design decisions, policymakers must face the key trade -off for all BBEL programs: moral 
hazard versus stigma. On one side, moral hazard concerns push designers to charge penalty 
rates,7 restrict collateral types and counterparties, and in general place limits on the 
program. Their reasoning is that restrictive terms both prevent excessive use or abuse of the 
program during the crisis itself and provide fair warning to banks to keep risk in check to 
avoid a future crisis. This side of the trade-off is dominant in some policy discussions. 
But on the other side, penalty rates and other punitive terms create stigma for any disclosed 
users of the program.  Depositors and other market participan ts infer that any financial 
institution willing to pay punitive terms must be in some trouble.  That belief can stigmatize 
users and depress participation in the program.  If financial institutions are unwilling to 
participate, then of course the program will be less effective at stopping a panic.  
The need to balance moral hazard and stigma impacts many design decisions and is to some 
extent unavoidable. When the pendulum swings too hard toward the prevention of moral 
hazard, we see examples of programs that  go unused, and sometimes cause stigma that can 
persist even beyond the original crisis. Our penultimate Key Design Decision, No. 19, Stigma 
Strategy, discusses methods used to minimize this outcome, and in the “Conclusion” section, 
we provide a restatement of Bagehot’s dictum informed by these methods. 
  
 
7 One paper notes th at “even though Bagehot did not explicitly raise this issue, his insistence on high rates is 
typically seen [by scholars] as an important measure to alleviate such moral hazard. Indeed, the argument that 
penalty rates curb moral hazard is a widespread one” (Castiglionesi and Wagner 2012). 
93
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
Discussion of Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: Why was the program implemented? What problem was it addressing?  
What was its mandate?  
BBEL programs are a central bank’s traditional re sponse to liquidity pressures . However, 
such stresses present themselves in varying ways. Among our cases, two circumstances 
appear most commonly as the problems the BBEL  programs are designed to address . The 
first, cited by 31 of 3 3 cases, as shown on Figure 2 , is that general liquidity stresses  are 
occurring in the funding markets, constraining financial institutions from lending among 
themselves and onward to the real economy. Events that can trigger these situations include 
a run on a major bank (as occurred in Hong Kong 1965), tensions in the payment system (as 
occurred in the several US NYCH cases and the two Russia cases), actual or anticipated spikes 
in interest rates and tightening of the funding markets precipitated by other develop ments 
(such as the liquidity crisis sparked in 1914 by the start of World War I, which prompted the 
use of the US Aldrich-Vreeland emergency currency), and the anticipated tightening of credit 
(as in 2000, when the end of century date approached, discussed in the US Y2K cases).  
Figure 2: Primary Purpose 
Primary purpose 
articulated/identified Cases Total 
Address conditions in credit and 
money markets/enhance flow of 
credit/provide liquidity insurance 
Canada CT Repo, Canada Term PRA-PS, Canada Term PRA, 
ECB FTOs, ECB TROs, Hong Kong 2008, Hungary Liquidity,(a) 
Russia LO, Thailand FIDF,(b) UK BoE 1825, UK BoE 1866,  UK 
DWF, UK ECTR/CTRF, UK ILTR, US Aldrich-Vreeland,  
US NYCH 1893, US NYCH 1914, US NYCH 1873, US NYCH 1884, 
US NYCH 1890, US NYCH 1907, US RFC 1932–1933, US TAF, 
US Y2K SLF, US Y2K SFF 
25 
Facilitate counterparties’ 
management of balance 
sheets/finance illiquid assets 
Hong Kong 1965, Russia OBR  2 
A combination of the above Canada TLF, Greece ELA,(c) Norway Covered Bond, UK ELTR, 
US FHLB GFC, US FHLB 1932–1941 
6 
(a) The Hungary scheme occurred in an environment where the Hungarian forint (HUF) was experiencing rapid devaluation. The 
Hungarian central bank (MNB) extended liquidity through foreign exchange (FX) loans to address the risk that banks would sell 
HUF to meet their FX needs, which would have placed even more pressure on the depreciating exchange rate. 
(b) The Thailand scheme, which provided liquidity to troubled nonbank financial institutions, articulated no clear purpose, consistent 
with its nonpublic nature. Based on information available later, at least two conflicting priorities appear to have been in play—to 
save the financial system and protect the central bank’s balance sheet. 
(c) The Bank of Greece (BoG) cited bank runs and collateral issues in describing the purpose of the program. These events were 
occurring at a time when Greece sovereign bonds, a significant bank asset and collateral, were no longer eligible for ECB funding. 
The banks had also lost access to such funding because of concerns regarding their solvency. 
Source: Authors’ analysis.  
Although not dispositive, the purpose is a main driver of program design . In addressing 
generalized liquidity situations , central banks most often lead by extending liquidity to 
longer maturities than they offer under their existing standing facilities  (Sankar 2022c) , 
increasing the amount of liquidity that is available (Runkel 2022a), and providing liquidity 
94
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 12 ---
at rates that a re favorable to the then market rates and not so high as to stigmatize 
borrowers. For example, the ECB FTO imposed a “penalty” rate but only  a slight one, and 
many of its auctions were oversubscribed (Runkel 2022a). The LOLR may also seek to widen 
the group of eligible participants, as occurred in the US during the Great Depression. The US 
RFC 1932–1933 and US FHLB 1932–1941 were created to provide liquidity to entities that 
had no LOLR . The US RFC  1932–1933 supported both banks and a broad set of nonbank 
financial institutions (NBFIs), with a focus on those that lent to small businesses, especially 
farmers. The US FHLB 1932–1941 supported nonbank mortgage lenders “including savings 
and loan associations (S&Ls), mutual savings banks, and life insurance companies” (Leonard 
2022a; Leonard 2022d; Wheelock 2008 ). If the panic persists into the chronic phase, we 
observe that the LOLR may adjust several of these factors to make liquidity generally more 
available and responsive to the developing situation. The European Central Bank expanded 
the frequency, maturities, size, and set of eligible collateral for several of its standing term 
refinancing operations during the GFC (Trichet 2009). 
A second purpose, cited in eight of 33 cases, was a focus on assisting counterparties with 
managing their balance sheets  by funding collateral that had become illiquid . This 
circumstance applied in the Greece ELA and the Russia OBR cases, which were addressing in 
part sovereign debt that had become illi quid as collateral, and several cases targeted to 
rehabilitating mortgage-related collateral: Norway Covered Bond, Canada TLF, and US FHLB 
1932–1941. LOLRs interested in addressing b anking crises spurred by collateral -based 
concerns will want to review our Key Design Decision No. 11, Collateral, for common issues 
and practices utilized in this environment.  
We also observe that six of 33 cases cited both primary reasons as bas es for the programs. 
For example , as stated in the announcement relating to the Canada TLF: “By providing 
greater flexibility for liquidity provision with respect to eligible collateral, the TLF will 
facilitate further improvement in money and credit markets” (BoC 2008b). 
In addition, three LOLRs pursued their BBEL programs during unique broad-based systemic 
disruptions. First, in the Hungary Liquidity Scheme during the GFC, a sudden devaluation of 
the local currency accompanied the tightening of the credit markets. As a result, the Ministry 
of Finance coordinated with the central bank and financial supervisory agency to provide 
liquidity in foreign currency. Second, t he Thai Financial Institutions Development Fund 
(FIDF) addressed failed liquidity (and possibly solvency) not for banks, but for “ troubled 
financial institutions” (BOT n.d.). Third, in the Greece ELA, the Bank of Greece (BoG) stepped 
in to provide liquidity to the entire banking system, intermediating between the banks and 
the ECB because Greek banks could no longer access ECB lending (Runkel 2022c). 
We include one program because of its unusually high usage during the GFC, even though it 
was not designed to address crisis situations.  The Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLBank) 
System is a government -sponsored enterprise (GSE) 8 created to support housing finance . 
 
8 In the US, government-sponsored enterprises are quasi–public private entities, such as the FHLBanks, Fannie 
Mae, and Freddie Mac, that operate with both public and private attributes. For example, GSEs enjoy an implied 
government guarantee, which has been shown to effectively lower their borrowing costs (Leonard 2022b).  
95
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
The 11 FHLBanks operate a standing facility that provides funding, called “advances” —
collateralized by m ortgages and mortgage -related assets —to banks, thrifts, insurance 
companies, and credit unions (Narajabad and Gissler 2017a). FHLBank advances increased 
by 50% between the summer of 2007 and the fall of 2008, as members faced considerable 
stress and contraction in the wholesale funding markets  (Narajabad and Gissler 2017b) . 
Much of this increase was from large commercial banks, which previously made up only a 
very small portion of the FHLBanks’ lending.9 From the summer of 2007 to March 2008, the 
FHLB was the primary source of lending for depository institutions that also were eligible to 
borrow from the Federal Reserve’s discount window (Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame 2008). Even 
as use of the DW bore acknowledged stigma issues , during this period, the FHLB advances 
were the low-cost choice, despite the Fed’s having lowered the primary credit rate (Ashcraft, 
Bech, and Frame 2008) . FHLBank borrowing lessened after March 2008 as the discount 
window became the cheaper option and the Federal Reserve introduced a series of new 
funding programs (Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame 2008; Narajabad and Gissler 2017b). Although 
the Fed eclipsed the FHLBanks in terms of total lending during the GFC, the FHLBank System 
was the largest lender to US depository institutions ; much of the Fed ’s liquidity operations 
was for the benefit of  nondepository or foreign financial institutions  (Ashcraft, Bech, and 
Frame 2008).  
Scholars and Federal Reserve officials have expressed concern over th e FHLBank System’s 
expanded lending and its perceived role as “lender of next -to-last-resort” (Narajabad and 
Gissler 2017a). Although the FHLBanks provided a significant amount of liquidity, especially 
during the early stages of the GFC, the FHLB System does not have a mandate as a LOLR or 
as a financial regulator. In making loans, it may not have considered issues of systemic risk.  
2. Legal Authority: What legal basis did authorities rely on? Was a new law needed, 
or did they rely on existing authority? 
Most often, the first action a central bank 10 pursues to address a liquidity constraint is to 
utilize its traditional or standing lending tools established under its basic authority to lend 
to banks: its discount window or open  market (repurchase agreement, or repo) operations 
(Cheun, von Köppen -Mertes, and Weller 2009) . Early steps a central bank takes include 
announcing a willingness to lend and promoting the availability of existing facilities. It may 
also make initial changes to standing facilities so they are more attractive sources of funding: 
lowering the borrowing rate, lengthening  the maturity of loans, expanding the  eligible 
 
9 During the second half of 2007, FHLBank advances increased by USD 235 billion to USD 875 billion (a 36.7% 
increase). Ten FHLBank members accounted for almost USD 150 billion of this new advance lending. The 
largest borrowers were Washington Mutual, Bank of America, and Countrywide, whose borrowings increased 
between Q2 and Q4 2007 by USD 42.4 billion, USD 25.5 billion, and USD 18.9 billion, respectively.  In total, 
FHLBank advances continued to grow into 2008, albeit at a slower rate, and stood at USD 914 billion as of June 
30, 2008 (Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame 2008).  
10 In a few historical cases discussed herein (see Figure 1), a private entity is acting as LOLR, but most of these 
experiences provide evidence as to why countries migrate to a government-sanctioned LOLR, usually a central 
bank. Some of the drawbacks to a private LOLR can include bias, limited jurisdiction, and the inability to print 
currency without further authorization from the government. 
96
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 14 ---
collateral, enlarging lending capacity, and increasing the frequency with which loans are 
available.  
Consistent with this theory, in August 2007, in response to sudden stresses in the interbank 
funding markets,  the Federal Reserve Board “lowered the primary credit rate to 5.75 
percent—50 basis points above the funds rate —and provided for 30 -day term lending 
through the discount window” (Champ and Wakefield 2007) ; unfortunately, borrowing 
remained limited because of  significant stigma atta ched to DW borrowing (Cheun, von 
Köppen-Mertes, and Weller 2009 ; Runkel 2022f). However, such “first movement” actions 
can be very effective in addressing early signs of liquidity constraints. For example, when the 
European interbank market tightened in Au gust 2007, the ECB used four large fine -tuning 
operations (FTOs) through its open market desk—which were announced and settled within 
the day—to support eurozone banks through the week (Runkel 2022a; Trichet 2010). These 
operations succeeded in calming the tensions in the short-term segment of the euro area 
money market, which, if left unaddressed, might have “caused a  systemic liquidity threat to 
the financial system as a whole” (Trichet 2010). 
A few of our cases address these types of “first movement” instances, but most do not; such 
occurrences are not easily identified, especially if they are successful. Because they involve 
the central bank’s standing facilities, such actions usually are not separately administered or 
publicized and might be discussed only in periodic administrative reports. For these reasons, 
the BBEL programs discussed in this survey are, in most cases, specific actions that a central 
bank publicly announced as dedicated measures to address a liquidity constraint. The 
authorities supporting such BBEL programs can be divided into four groups , as shown on 
Figure 3: 
• Applications of regular preexisting authorities, 
• Applications of preexisting emergency authorities, 
• Programs that required the granting of new authorities, and 
• Programs that were deployed under opaque legal authority. 
  
97
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 3: Legal Authority 
Short-form case name 
Origins in 
a pre- 
existing 
facility 
Used 
existing 
regular 
authority 
Used existing 
regular 
authority in a 
novel manner 
(a) 
Used 
existing 
emergency 
authority 
(b) 
New 
authority 
granted 
Authority 
was 
opaque (c) 
Canada CT Repo  Yes X     
Canada Term PRA-PS Yes   X   
Canada TLF No X     
Canada Term PRA  Yes   X   
ECB FTOs Yes X     
ECB TROs Yes X     
Greece ELA Yes  X X   
Hong Kong 1965 (d) No X     
Hong Kong 2008 Yes   X   
Hungary Liquidity No    X  
Norway Covered Bond No    X  
Russia OBR No     X 
Russia LO Yes  X    
Thailand FIDF No X   X  
UK BoE 1825 No     X 
UK BoE 1866 (e) Yes X  X   
UK DWF Yes X     
UK ELTR Yes X     
UK ECTR/CTRF No   X   
UK ILTR Yes X  X   
US Aldrich-Vreeland (f) No X   X  
US FHLB 1932–1941 No    X  
US FHLB GFC Yes X     
US NYCH 1893 Yes     X 
US NYCH 1914 Yes     X 
US NYCH 1873 Yes     X 
US NYCH 1884 Yes     X 
US NYCH 1890 Yes     X 
US NYCH 1907 Yes     X 
US RFC 1932–1933 No    X  
US TAF No  X    
US Y2K SLF No  X    
US Y2K SFF No  X    
Totals 19/Yes 12 5 7 6 8 
(a) The LOLR utilized its authority in a new manner as to form of design, participants, or breadth. For example, the Fed 
amended its Regulation A to authorize the issuance of options in connection with the US Y2K SLF, and Greece’s use 
of the ELA was the first broad-based application to an entire banking system (Leonard 2022e; Runkel 2022c).  
(b) For these facilities, the LOLR used an authority that was delineated as being available when some heightened level 
of distress existed.  
(c) These programs were implemented in circumstances where their legality was not evident or was questionable. In 
most circumstances, the government authorities recognized the opaque legality but chose not to prosecute the 
LOLR, likely because few, if any, government tools were available to address the crisis. However, the Russian 
securities’ regulator brought action against the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) with respect to the OBRs (bonds the 
CBR issued for use as collateral in its lending facilities), which were held to be illegal (Hoffner 2022c). 
(d) In 1965, Hong Kong had a largely laissez-faire financial system without a legal LOLR. Two private British note-
issuing banks, HSBC and Chartered Bank, intervened during the crisis by lending to distressed local banks. Although 
these private, emergency interbank loans did not call upon any emergency legal authorities, the government 
partially funded the relief operations by injecting liquidity into several banks through HSBC and Chartered Bank as 
conduits. These government liquidity injections were rare and exceptional measures (Goodstadt 2005; Jao 1974).  
98
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 16 ---
(e) The BoE, acting as private LOLR, almost exhausted its reserves. However, it was restricted from issuing notes not 
backed by gold. Therefore, it requested a suspension of this requirement as provided for in the Charter Act of 1844, 
which the Exchequer granted, allowing the BoE to provide sufficient liquidity to calm money markets (Fulmer 
2022d). 
(f) In 1914, the US for the first time deployed the national emergency currency authorized by the Aldrich-Vreeland Act 
of 1908. Treasury Secretary William McAdoo asked Congress to amend the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 to provide 
eligibility for large banks to participate in the emergency currency and to suspend the USD 500 million limit on 
total issuance, broadening the reach of the currency (Fulmer 2022i). 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Applications of Regular Preexisting Authorities 
Slightly more than half of our cases, 19 of 33, involved BBEL programs that a LOLR 
implemented using its existing regular (12) and emergency -level (7) authorities. These 
programs generally increased funding o pportunities, extended maturities, or accept ed a  
broader range of collateral. Many such programs reference or modify a standing facility as 
these types of adjustments are often the quickest steps to implement in response to a 
liquidity crisis.  
For example , before the GFC, the BoE regularly used monthly long-term repo (LTR) 
operations at a range of maturities to manage its balance sheet (Fulmer 2022h). As market 
liquidity tightened in late 2007, the BoE introduced Extended-Collateral Long-Term Repos 
(ELTRs), which offered longer maturities and accepted a broader set of collateral than its 
existing LTRs. In June 2010, the BoE replaced the ELTRs with the Indexed Long -Term Repo 
(ILTR) program to make the wider set of collateral a permanent part of its tool kit. Since the 
creation of the ELTRs was only an adjustment to the regularly scheduled open market 
operations (OMOs), they did not require additional legislation or external approval (Fulmer 
2022g). During the GFC, the BoE accomplished most of its liquid ity support measures using 
its existing authorities. 
Also, during the GFC, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority  (HKMA) implemented multiple 
enhancements to its discount window using its existing authority: ( i) expanded the eligible 
collateral to include high-quality US dollar assets, (ii) extended the maximum maturity from 
overnight to as long as three months, and (iii) reduced the cost of borrowing by waiving the 
5% penalty imposed on banks that borrowed against more than 50% of their holdings of 
Exchange Fund paper at the discount window (HKMA 2008a). The Bank of Canada (BoC) also 
modified or referenced standing programs when implementing several of its GFC programs, 
such as its repo facilities, Term Purchase and Resale Agreement Facility ( Term PRA), and 
Private-Sector Term Repurchase and Resale Agreements (Term PRA-PS).  
Because BBEL programs are usually the “first line of defense” in a liquidity constraint , they 
may be implemented when only limited information is known about the ensuing panic. Thus, 
the BBEL program may need to be adjusted or augmented as additional information becomes 
known to the LOLR or as circumstances change. As the constraint develops from the acute to 
the chronic phase, flexibility and continued monitoring are advised.  
99
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
When use of existing authorities in a traditional manner did not succeed, central banks in 
five of our cases devised novel programs to address their liquidity constraints. For example, 
in anticipation of the Y2K century date change, the Fed introduced the Standby Financing 
Facility (US Y2K SFF), which auctioned three sets (or “strips”) of options to primary dealers 
that could be exercised for overnight repos on specific dates around the year -end (FRBNY 
1999). Approximately USD 481 billion of options were sold; however, because the Y2K event 
did not cause excessive strain in the credit markets, no options were exercised (Drossos and 
Hilton 2000) . Drossos and Hilton  (2000) conclude that the program calmed markets 
primarily through the “announcement effect ”—“implied year -end funding premiums 
declined substantially when the details of the options auction were unveiled, after the early 
auction results were announced, and later on when the [Open Market Trading] Desk [at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York ] extended the number of auctions.” In addition , the 
authors report that personnel at the Desk reported that “ many dealers indicated that the 
options program helped ease their anxieties about prospective market conditions around 
the year-end” (Drossos and Hilton 2000).  
During the GFC, the Fed again designed a novel program to address stigma at the discount 
window, which was experiencing only limited use even  though the Fed had lowered rates. 
Despite these changes, usage waned in part because of greater usage of ad vances from the 
FHLBank System. Rather than continue to adjust the terms of the DW significantly, the  Fed 
chose to implement the Term Auction Facility (TAF), which was designed to provide DW 
funding without stigmatizing borrowers (FOMC 2007a). The Fed staff was of the opinion that 
the TAF “arguably had a better chance of avoiding stigma, partly because the auction format 
implies that no institution was being forced to borrow” (FOMC 2007b). It also increased the 
number of borrowers, delayed settlement, and limited the amount of funding (FOMC 2007a). 
These factors are further discussed at Key Design Decision No. 19, Stigma Strategy. 
Applications of Preexisting Emergency Authorities  
In additi on to a LOLR’s regular authorities , some LOLRs also have authorities that are 
reserved for emergencies or situations of heightened distress. Often, the enabling statute 
requires that some specified standard be met to activate the authority, and a formal finding 
or certain process may be required. As our examples evidence, these emergency authorities 
are designed to address systemic concerns. 
In what was an unprecedented move, during the GFC, Greece provided Emergency Liquidity 
Assistance (ELA) for its banks on a systemwide basis. ELA was an extraordinary relief the 
national central bank provided. The risk of ELA liquidity was not shared with other eurozone 
members and was originally designed to address the special needs of a failing “systemically 
relevant financial institution”  (ECB 2008c). Bank of Greece Deputy Governor John (Iannis) 
Mourmouras describes ELA as follows: 
100
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 18 ---
Domestic ELA procedures are used by central banks to address the liquidity proble ms 
of banks that are essentially solvent. ELA is an emergency liquidity line provided by  
national central banks (NCBs) to solvent banks that exceptionally and temporarily no 
longer have c ollateral of sufficiently high quality to obtain funding via conventi onal 
Eurosystem operations. These lines are set up at the discretion and under the 
responsibility of the NCBs . . . ELA should be seen as a means of handling acute problems, 
to give the authorities time to decide whether other crisis management measures ar e 
needed, such as restructuring of troubled institutions. (Mourmouras 2017) 
ELA is provided by the national central bank at its discretion. The national central bank must 
inform the Governing Council of the ECB of its intent to provide ELA and adhere to specific 
criteria. Although technically the Governing Council does not approve ELA but can only 
disapprove its issuance once notified by the national central bank, in practical terms, its 
administration of the Greece ELA operated as an approval. 11 Previous uses of ELA by 
eurozone member states had provided ELA assistance typically to only one or two banks  
(Praet 2016).12 However, by the time the ECB published its ELA Procedures, in 2013, in light 
of the ongoing impacts of the European sovereign debt crisis,  the wording reflected 
assistance to “a solvent financial institution, or group of solvent financial institutions, that is 
facing temporary liquidity problems” (ECB 2013) . Peter Praet, member of the executive 
board of the ECB, comments that the crisis had two major impacts on ELA: 
This situation led to two types of innovation in the governance of ELA interventions: 
first, the duration of assistance lengthened; second, the scope of assistance broadened 
from individual institutions to entire bankin g systems. For example, in Greece last year 
the combined lending of the ECB and the Bank of Greece to Greek banks reached 71% of 
the country’s GDP. Most of this liquidity was provided via banks’ recourse to ELA. (Praet 
2016, 5-6) 
Under Section 18(g) of the Bank of Canada Act (Legislative Services Branch 1985), the bank 
has a two -part emergency authority that it may utilize in situations that challenge the 
stability of the Canadian financial system. Subparagraph 18(g)(ii) provides practically 
unlimited authority to the bank to purchase any security, including equities, if the Governor 
determines that “there is a severe and unusual stress on a financial market or the financial 
system.”13 To date, the bank has never taken action under the crisis authority in 
Subparagraph 18(g)(ii). 
 
11 For a detailed discussion of the legal underpinnings of ELA and its application to Greece, see Lee (2016). 
Also see Key Design No. 4, Management. 
12 Generally, ECB ELA was initially intended for individual  banks, and prior and contemporary applications in 
Belgium, Ireland, and Cyprus largely funneled liquidity to one or more large banks , whereas, in Greece, the 
entire banking system was compromised. See Lee (2016) for a discussion of the ECB ELA interventions. Also, 
ELA interventions evolved in two significant ways: “first, the duration of assistance lengthened; second, the 
scope of assistance broadened from individual institutions to entire banking systems” (Praet 2016, 6). 
13 Subparagraph 18(g)(ii) of the act reads: “[I]f the Governor is of the opinion that there is a severe and unusual 
stress on a financial market or the financial system, [the BoC may] buy and sell from or to any person any 
securities and any other financial instruments, to the extent  determined necessary by the Governor” 
(Legislative Services Branch 1985).  
101
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
Short of such situations, the partner Subparagraph 18(g)(i) permits the bank to expand the 
range of securities and financial instruments that it may purchase in the normal course “for 
purposes of addressing a situation of financial system stress that could have material 
macroeconomic consequences ” (BoC 2008c ; Legislative Services Branch 1985 ). In such a 
circumstance, the BoC may “buy and sell from or to any person securities and any other 
financial instruments — other than instruments that evidence an ownership interest or right 
in or to an entity” (BoC 2008c; Legislative Services Branch 1985).  
The expanded range of securities and financial instruments that the BoC may purchase 
pursuant to Subparagraph 18(g)(i) is broad and  includes: securities guaranteed by the 
Canadian, provincial, or US government ; and Canadian dollar  (CAD)–denominated bonds, 
commercial paper (CP), and asset-backed securities. Such “exceptional transactions” cannot 
extend beyond a term of 180 -days, and the bank must publish its intent to engage in such 
transactions, including targeted securities, counterparties , and other relevant information 
prior to conducting such transactions (BoC 2008c; Legislative Services Branch 1985).  
During the GFC, two Canadian programs were the subject of a Subparagraph 18(g)(i) notice. 
The BoC had the authority to perform repo transactions and had done so before launching 
the Canada Term PRA facility in 2007, but it had to amend the policy statement that 
implements the Bank of Canada Act to allow it to lend longer than 180 days under the 
program (Sankar 2022c). The second program, the Canada Term PRA -PS, was desi gned to 
provide liquidity to large money market participants, also through repos, and accepted 
commercial paper, asset -backed commercial paper  (ABCP), bankers’ acceptances, and 
corporate bonds as collateral (Sankar 2022a). 
The UK ECTR/CTRF presents a sligh tly different scenario using an emergency authority. In 
light of continuing exceptional stresses in financial markets, the BoE announced the program 
in December 2011, describing it as “a new contingency liquidity facility . . . designed to 
mitigate risks t o financial stability arising from a market -wide shortage of short -term 
sterling liquidity” (BoE 2011). The program allowed swapping of sterling cash for eligible 
collateral on a short-term basis and could be implemented by the BoE’s governor if liquidity 
pressures emerged, which they did six months later. The facility was activated in June 2012 
with a n announcement stating that it was “d esigned to respond to actual or prospective 
market-wide stress of an exceptional nature” (BoE 2012). 
The BoE’s liquidity framework makes clear that the ECTR inhabits the position reserved for 
crises situations of  “actual or prospective market -wide stress m eaning banks need cheap, 
plentiful cash at term” rather than predictable regular liquidity needs or firm -specific 
liquidity needs resulting from  specific shocks (BoE 2013) . The structure of the BoE law 
permitted the preemptory adoption of this “exceptional” facility as a precautionary measure, 
which provided an opportunity to ready the facility before actual need. The BoE determined 
use of the facility to be a success in helping to bring down short -term sterling funding costs 
in 2012. It retained the program as a standing facility in its framework and reactivated the 
ECTR in June 2020 (BoE 2013). 
102
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 20 ---
The Hong Kong 2008 case  is another that relie d on a heightened level of authority. The 
HKMA’s LOLR policy sets out a three -tier framework for liquidity support that  is similar to 
that of the UK framework. The authority of the HKMA is intricately linked to the Exchange 
Fund, whose primary purpose is to maintain the value of the Hong Kong currency. Provided 
that the HKMA honors the currency board rules, the HKMA has legal authority to administer 
emergency liquidity support to an individual institution or the banking system utilizing the 
Exchange Fund when circumstances threaten the stability of the monetary or financial 
systems (HKMA 1999; Legislative Council 1997). One relevant policy statement stresses that 
such LOLR assistance must be for systemic purposes.14 In September 2008, impacts from the 
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy and stresses in the US were resulting in tightening in interbank 
lending in Hong Kong  (Hoffner 2022b). Although the HKMA considered its normal system 
for providing liquidity at the systemic and institutional levels to have prepared the banking 
system for turbulent times, in light of the market developments, the HKMA announced five 
temporary measures “intended to reinforce this framework at a time of instability and stress 
in the world financial system” (HKMA 2008b).  
What these cases demonstrate is that some central banks see value in differentiating the 
provision of liquidity support, and specifically in anticipating situations of heightened stress 
that might require BBEL programs to arrest tension in the system. They also demonstrate 
that this preplanning and prepositioning of authority can have value and lead to heightened 
awareness and rapid respo nse when needed. To this end, the procedures for utilizing such 
authorities should be clearly stated and set out ahead of time so necessary steps can be taken 
expeditiously during a crisis.  Lastly, it is also worth noting that the standing emergency 
authorities may indicate recognition by the legislature that their exercise and the tools they 
represent are worthy of additional scrutiny by a designated authority (the governor of the 
central bank in the case of the UK and Canada, and the financial secretary in Hong Kong) to 
be triggered.  
Such is also the case with one of the most powerful tools the Fed utilized during the GFC, 
Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act  of 1913 (FRA) , which provides broad lending 
authority once the Fed Board finds that “unusual and exigent” circumstances exist and other 
specified provisions are met.15 Section 13(3) was the basis for such broad -based programs 
as the Primary Dealer Cred it Facility (which also may be categorized as a BBEL  program) 
 
14 And although this policy statement is primarily concerned with LOLR assistance to individual institutions, its 
requirements also seem to apply to broad -based liquidity such as the five measures introduced in September 
2008 (Hoffner 2022b). The policy statement includes the following paragraph: 
This means that in considering whether to provide LOLR support to an individual authorized institution, 
the guiding principle must be whether the failure of that institution would, either by itself or through 
spreading contagion to other institutions, damage the stability of the  exchange rate or the monetary and 
financial systems. Such a contagion effect could arise, for example, where other institutions are heavily 
exposed to the troubled institution or share similar characteristics which could be interpreted as the 
origin of it s problems. The vulnerability of other institutions to the contagion effect will also depend on 
the general tone of sentiment at the time, e.g. whether there is heightened nervousness about the stability 
of the banking or the monetary systems. (HKMA 1999, 77–78) 
15 Section 13(3) was also the basis for lending to avoid the failure of significant nonbank institutions such as 
Bear Stearns and American International Group (Alvarez, Baxter, and Hoyt 2020; Wiggins et al. 2021). The Fed 
could have used the section’s authority to implement additional BBEL programs (Federal Reserve Act 2017). 
103
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
and market-focused programs such as the Term Securities Lending Facility and Commercial 
Paper Funding Facility, which are considered in Rhee et al. (2020). In the aftermath of the 
GFC, Section 13(3) was narrowed to require, among other things, that programs be designed 
for broad-based eligibility and not for the benefit of an individual firm  and to require that 
the Fed seek the approval of the Treasury secretary before implementation (Federal Reserve 
Act 2017).  
Programs That Required the Granting of New Authorities  
Sometimes, during a panic, the LOLR exhaust s its authorities and needs additional tools to 
continue to address the developing situation.  Among our cases, six represent instances 
where countries adopted new laws or amended existing laws to facilitate BBEL programs. In 
each case, the BBEL authority was tailored to the unique situation presented.  
In 1914, the US for the first time deployed the national emergency currency adopted 
pursuant to the Aldrich -Vreeland Act in 1908. However, Treasury Secretary McAdoo 
requested that Congress amend the FRA to provide eligibility for large banks to participate 
in the emergency currency and to suspend the USD 500 million limit on total issuance, 
broadening the reach of the currency (Silber 2008). Commentators have generally view ed 
the use of emergency currency as successful and as having helped to prevent a protracted 
panic (Sprague 1915). 
In 1997, at the onset of the Asian Financial Crisis, the Thai FIDF was authorized to lend to 
distressed finance companies, and during the early part of that year it began secretly to make 
loans to the country’s 91 nonbank finance companies. Lending proved significant and 
reached a peak outstanding of more than 430 billion Thai baht (THB; USD 17 billion 16) in 
August (Haksar and Giorgianni 2000; Lindgren et al. 2000; see BOT 2009 for size of support). 
As liquidity problems deepened to threaten finance company creditors, the government 
considered how to free up collateral to be recovered by private creditors. In October, the 
Thai Parliament passed an emergency decree allowing the FIDF to relinquish collateral 
already held, make new unsecured loans, and raise member fees if the FIDF’s board of 
directors “deem[ed] it necessary to restore the fairness and soundness o f [sic] financial 
system” (Emergency Decree B.E. 2540 1997, 3) . Ultimately, because of an inability to judge 
the health of the finance companies, accepting collateral of dubious value, and making 
uncollateralized loans, the FIDF lost more than THB 400 bill ion when a significant number 
of the finance companies failed (BOT 2002). 
Additionally, during the Great Depression in the US, Congress created two new federal 
agencies to provide liquidity to segments of the financial system that had no LOLR. The 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) provided funding to banks and other 
corporations that could not borrow from the Fed and the Federal Home Loan Bank System 
made loans to private institutions that specialized in “home mortgage loans, including 
savings and loan associations (S&Ls), mutual savings banks, and life insurance companies” 
 
16 The baht was fixed at THB 25=USD 1 until July 2, 1997. It peaked above THB 50 per dollar before settling 
around THB 40=USD 1 (Nabi and Shivakumar 2001).  
104
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 22 ---
(Wheelock 2008). Decades later, at the start of the GFC, the FHLB ank System again played a 
role as “lender of next t o last resort” as discussed  in Key Design Decision No. 1, Purpose.  
(Narajabad and Gissler 2017a). 
In 2008, the Norwegian Parliament authorized the Ministry of Finance to implement a swap 
program in which eligible banks and mortgage companies exchanged covered bonds for 
Treasury bills to increase banking sector liquidity (Norges Bank 2010).  
During the GFC, international investors fled Hungarian government bonds and other assets, 
causing a strain on liquidity for Hu ngarian banks because of  a prevalence of short -term, 
foreign currency –denominated liabilities (IMF 2011) . To improve the overall liquidity 
position of the banking system and maintain lending to the real economy, in March 2009, the 
Hungarian Parliament amen ded the Act on Public Finances to authorize the Ministry of 
Finance to extend uncollateralized medium -term foreign-currency loans under commercial 
terms to credit institutions in Hungary, including subsidiaries of foreign banks (EC 2010; IMF 
2011). Because Hungary was part of the E uropean Union (EU)—although not part of the 
eurozone—the program was subject to EU review as State Aid. The program was found to be 
“non notified aid,” and a breach of EU regulations, but the European Commission  (EC) 
ultimately authorized its use. See Mott and Buchholtz (2022) for a detailed discussion of this 
program.  
One important fact to note with respect to changes in legal authority or new laws that 
implement BBEL programs is that , given the position of BBEL  programs as a first response 
in the initial acute phase of a crisis, time is of the essence. Lengthy, drawn-out debates are 
unlikely to provide a sense of confiden ce to financial institutions and markets struggling to 
manage liquidity constraints. In this regard, central banks and governments  may be well 
advised to review their arsenal s of standing authorities and crisis -fighting tools in quiet 
times and pursue any adjustments before the next crisis. Secondly, authorities may also want 
to consider adopting some crisis-era BBEL programs as standing facilities to ensure that they 
are ready and available when the next panic occurs. The UK did just this, incorporating tw o 
of its temporary emergency programs, the UK ECTR/CTRF and the UK ILTR, into its standing 
framework (BoE 2013; Fulmer 2022f; Fulmer 2022g). Similarly, Hong Kong retained two of 
its five temporary measures, incorporating the discretionary lending and swap facilities into 
its standing toolbox (Hoffner 2022b).  
Programs That Were Deployed under Opaque Legal Authority 
In a developing financial crisis, the LOLR may take actions even where its legal authority is 
not totally clear . This circumstance appears in eight of our cases, six of which involve the 
New York Clearing House Association  (NYCH) issuance of clearinghouse loan certificates 
(CLCs)17 during several panics in the 19th and 20th centuries. According to the National Bank 
 
17 The New York Clearing House Association (NYCH) developed a mechanism, the clearinghouse loan certificate 
(CLC), to address recurring liquidity strains resulting from a variety of causes, such as stress of a systemically 
important bank or the illiquidity of a signi ficant collateral  class. The CLCs were collateralized bills that the 
NYCH membership jointly guaranteed and accepted for settling clearing balances  among member banks . The 
issuance of CLCs freed up cash that members could use for depositor withdrawals , which helped address runs 
105
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
Act of 1865, any currency not issued by a nationally chartered bank was subject to a 10% 
tax, priced extremely high to end the issuance of notes by state-chartered banks and private 
banks (US Congress 1865). Regulators did not weigh in on the legality of CLCs, although they 
also saw CLC issuance as essential to ending banking panics. In fact, the Comptroller of the 
Currency included an entire section on the usage of CLCs by the NYCH and other 
clearinghouses in a number of its annual reports without question ing their legality  (OCC 
1908; OCC 1914). Additionally, the CLCs were a model for the Aldrich -Vreeland emergency 
currency enacted by the government in 1908 and used once, during the Panic of 1914 , 
alongside CLCs; as in other cases,  the government did not object to the use of CLCs in that 
case (Fulmer 2022j). 
However, we located one contemporary court case from 1895, Philler et al. v. Patterson, from 
the Pennsylvania Supreme Court, that discusses the legitimacy of the Philadelphia Clearing 
House Association and loan certificates it issued that were similar to the CLCs issued by the 
NYCH. The case seems to support the legality of CLCs generally  (Philler et al. v. Patterson 
1895).18  
On less than firm legal ground were the small -denomination CLCs issued in some cities 
outside New York in the panics of 1893, 1907, and 1914, which circulated as money, and the 
certified checks that the NYCH and other clearinghouses issued  in lieu of currency in the 
panics of 1873, 1893, and 1907  (see Key Design Decision No. 3, Part of a Package) . Several 
authors in later decades argue that small-denomination CLCs issued outside New York were 
clearly illegal  because of their broad circulation  (Timberlake 1984) . Gorton a nd Tallman 
(2016, 27) say that certified checks were not considered “money ,” but that this view was 
“essentially a fiction.”  
Another example of a BBEL program operated with legal opacity occurred during the 
Russian ruble crisis. In August 1998, a liquidity crisis ensued in Russia after the government 
and Central Bank of Russia (CBR) jointly announced a ruble devaluation and the suspension 
of payment on certain ruble -denominated government bonds, domestic banks’ main 
collateral, which in turn effectively fr oze interbank lending. In September, without a 
functioning government -bond market and with many domestic banks unable to make 
payments, the CBR began issuing short-term, zero-coupon bonds (OBRs), which it exchanged 
for restructured, illiquid ruble Treasuries held by banks with outstanding debts to the CBR. 
The banks could then use the OBRs as collateral for the CBR’s lending facilities and to obtain 
 
on members and somewhat mitigated the need to sell assets at fire -sale prices. The CLCs were used in several 
major crises during the National Banking Era (1863–1913) and were also the model for the national emergency 
currency impleme nted by the Aldrich -Vreeland Act. (See Fulmer (2022b) for a discussion of the CLCs and 
Fulmer (2022i) for a discussion of the Aldrich-Vreeland emergency currency. 
18 According to the opinion by Justice Henry W. Williams in considering certificates issued by the Philadelphia 
Clearing House Association: “We are unable therefore to see in what respect these banks have violated the statutes 
of the United States relating to national banks or have transcended the limits which these statutes have drawn about 
the business of banking. . . This same method or one identical in general outline has been adopted by the banks in 
every great city in the United States and by many in other lands; and as far as I am aware, it has nowhere been held 
that the method is illegal” (Philler et al. v. Patterson 1895, 482).  
106
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 24 ---
overnight loans from the CBR. Banks could also use the relatively liquid OBRs to regulate 
their own liquidity through interbank markets (Hoffner 2022c).  
Although the CBR was authorized to act as a “creditor of last resort,” it did not have explicit 
legal approval to issue debt instruments. Its doing so was subject to public critique (on both 
sides) from industry professionals and legal challenge (Hoffner 2022c) . The chair of the 
Federal Commission on the Securities Market, Russia’s securities regulator, led a campaign 
against the CBR’s use of O BRs. The campaign was successful , and in January 1999  the 
prosecutor general ruled OBRs illegal (Hoffner 2022c). The CBR noted in its 1999 annual 
report that “placement of new issues [of OBRs] was suspended [at the beginning of the year] 
as the legal basis  of the Bank of Russia issuing its own bonds was questioned” (CBR 2000, 
56). Only after the passage of an amendment to the Central Bank Law, effective July 8, 1999, 
did the CBR receive legal approval for issuing OBRs. However murky their legal status, with  
the introduction of OBRs, the CBR did succeed in creating a more liquid collateral instrument 
for use in its lending facilities, which enabled banks to resume payments (Hoffner 2022c).  
Although encountered in only a handful of cases, these situations seem to illustrate that, in a 
crisis, LOLRs will stretch to find solutions to liquidity constraints, sometimes very creative 
ones. Additionally, given the circumstances, they may be granted some latitude in deploying 
such creativity, especially when there are  few alternatives and when the situation being 
addressed is particularly urgent. 
3. Part of a Package: What other measures did the authorities take? What additional 
measures did private LOLRs take, reflecting in part their lack of statutory powers?  
BBEL programs are often the first response in an acute phase, in part because they can 
seamlessly be rolled out as extensions of standing facilities.  Thus, to the extent that a BBEL 
program is part of a package, the central bank usually includes other BBEL programs. Among 
our cases, we identify five groupings where more than one BBEL program w as deployed in 
close proximity to another: Canada (GFC, three programs), ECB (two programs), Russia (two 
programs), UK ( four programs), and US Y2K ( two programs). These packages are only 
illustrative; as discussed in the individual cases and below , and as shown in Figure 4, 
additional BBEL programs or other types of support programs may have existed at the same 
time. Central banks adopted related programs for a few reasons: (i) to provide liquidity at 
different maturities , such as overnight and long  term, ( ii) to provide liquidity that 
accommodated different collateral classes, and (iii) to differentiate among classes of eligible 
participants. 
 
  
107
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 4: Part of a Package 
Short-form case name Part of a 
package (a) 
Additional 
liquidity 
facility  
Origins in a 
preexisting 
standing 
facility 
Selected other 
contemporaneous 
actions (b) 
Canada CT Repo  Yes Yes Yes  
Canada Term PRA-PS Yes Yes Yes  
Canada TLF Yes Yes  No  
Canada Term PRA(c)  Yes Yes Yes  
ECB FTOs No N/A Yes  
ECB TROs Yes Yes Yes  
Greece ELA No N/A Yes  
Hong Kong 1965 Yes No No Government emergency 
currency controls and 
liquidity injections 
Hong Kong 2008 Yes Yes Yes  
Hungary Liquidity Yes No No  
Norway Covered Bond Yes Yes No  
Russia OBR Yes Yes No  
Russia LO Yes Yes Yes  
Thailand FIDF No N/A Yes  
UK BoE 1825 No N/A No  
UK BoE 1866 No N/A Yes Government supports 
lifting restrictions on 
note issuance 
UK DWF  Yes Yes Yes  
UK ELTR No N/A Yes  
UK ECTR/CTRF No N/A No  
UK ILTR No N/A Yes  
US Aldrich-Vreeland Yes Yes No NYCH loan certificates 
US FHLB 1932–1941 No N/A No US RFC 1932–1933  
US FHLB GFC No N/A Yes US TAF 
US NYCH 1893 (d) Yes No Yes SC, SE, SI, TS 
US NYCH 1914 (d) Yes Yes Yes SI, Aldrich-Vreeland 
currency 
US NYCH 1873 (d) Yes No Yes RP, SC, SE, SI, TS 
US NYCH 1884 (d) Yes No Yes SE, SI 
US NYCH 1890 (d) Yes No Yes PLS, SE, SI, TS 
US NYCH 1907 (d) Yes No Yes PLS, SC, SE, SI, TS 
US RFC 1932–1933 No N/A No US FHLB 1932–1941 
US TAF Yes Yes Yes US FHLB GFC 
US Y2K SLF Yes Yes No  
US Y2K SFF Yes Yes No  
Total yes 22 of 33  15 of 33  21 of 33  
(a) Except for the NYCH cases, this column indicates that the LOLR of the program featured in the case 
implemented other programs in close proximity to the launch of the featured case. 
(b) Except as noted, this column indicates other contemporaneous actions an authority oth er than the 
LOLR of the program featured in the case undertook. 
(c) The Term PRA was the first of several GFC-era Bank of Canada programs to launch, so at the time it 
was announced, it was not part of a package, but the “package” ultimately included  the Term PRA-PS 
and TLF, as well as an (unused) USD swap facility. 
108
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 26 ---
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
As an example, the BoC implemented its Term PRA facility in December 2007 to complement 
its Standing Liquidity Facility (SLF). After the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, 
the BoC quickly expanded eligible collateral for its SLF to include Canadian dollar non -
mortgage loans  and conducted Term PRAs more frequently against a broader range of 
collateral. Over the next two months, it also announced the Term Loan Facility and the Term 
PRA facility for private-sector money market instruments (Term PRA-PS) (Zorn, Wilkins, 
and Engert 2009). The combined effect was to fill in gaps in its liquidity programs to include 
additional collateral and participants and provide loans at a range of extended maturities 
(Longworth 2010). The relationships among these programs are shown in Figure 5. 
  
(d) The following acronyms apply for NYCH cases: PLS: private bank loan syndicates; RP: reserve 
pooling; SC: suspension of cash convertibility; SE: special examinations of member banks; SI: 
suppression of member banks’ balance sheet information; and TS: Treasury support through bond 
redemptions or deposits at NYCH banks.  
109
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 5: Selected Canadian Liquidity Programs during the GFC 
Canadian GFC-era BBEL programs Existing Facility 
 
Term PRA facility 
Term PRA for 
private-sector 
instruments 
Term Loan Facility Standing Liquidity 
Facility 
First announced December 12, 2007 October 14, 2008 November 12, 2008 Standing facility 
established in 2003; 
collateral expanded 
in fall 2008 
Maturities Term liquidity for 
up to one year  
Term liquidity for up 
to three months  
Auction facility for 
term liquidity up to 
one month 
Overnight facility for 
temporary 
settlement 
imbalances 
Participants Primary dealers 
and, starting in 
October 2008, 
major banks that 
were direct 
participants in the 
Canadian payments 
system 
Money market and 
bond market 
participants through 
primary dealers; 
initially, primary 
dealers could 
participate in their 
own right 
Banks that were direct 
participants in the 
Canadian payments 
system  
Banks that were 
direct participants in 
the Canadian 
payments system 
Eligible collateral Securities eligible 
for the BoC’s 
Standing Liquidity 
Facility, a 
permanent 
overnight facility for 
temporary 
settlement 
imbalances 
Initially, investment-
grade private-sector 
money market 
instruments; later, 
included bonds 
issued by Canadian 
or foreign entities 
Non-mortgage loans Expanded in October 
2008 to include 
Canadian dollar non-
mortgage loans 
Frequency Varied from weekly 
to monthly  
Weekly Weekly On demand 
Peak outstanding 
(CAD) 
37 billion 3 billion 4 billion N/A 
Final expiration July 21, 2010 October 27, 2009 October 28, 2009 N/A 
Source: Authors’ analysis (BoC 2013). 
Central banks have extended many other types of support  alongside BBEL programs, such 
as credit and account guarantees in the acute , panic phase of crises, when the focus is on 
reassuring depositors and other bank creditors that bank liabilities are safe; asset purchases, 
recapitalizations, and loan guarantees in the chronic , extended phase of cris es, when the 
focus is on addressing any underlying solvency problems that remain. 
Major central banks implemented all these types of programs in the Global Financial Crisis. 
In the fall of 2008, the Fed, ECB, BoE, and BoC expanded their liquidity programs in response 
to the shock of the collapse of Lehman Brothers and other unprecedented events; in October, 
most developed countries  implemented new c redit and account guarantees, or 
supplemented existing ones . As the crisis persisted  into its chronic phase, these central 
banks contributed to government response s, often with the assistance and cooperation of 
the fiscal authorities,  that also included: ad hoc emergency liquidity to failing banks  and 
nonbank financial institutions , asset purchase program s, capital investment programs, 
stress tests (US), and loan guarantees (ECB 2010; Trichet 2010; YPFS n.d.2).  
110
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 28 ---
Again, during t he COVID -19 pandemic  of 2020 , which led to widespread and prolonged 
closures of public and commercial spaces, central banks rolled out a great number of crisis -
fighting programs within a very short period. For example, the BoC activated the CT Repo 
facility along with 11 additional financial stabilization and liquidity provision measures (BoC 
2020a; BoC 2020b; BoC 2020c). The F ed augmented a group of previously announced 
supports, including three liquidity facilities, by announcing on March 23, 2020, an additional 
set of interventions that included an asset purchase program, three new liquidity programs 
with financial support from the Treasury, and expansions to two previously implemented 
liquidity programs (Fed 2020). 
Additional Measures Taken by Private LOLRs 
The private LOLRs in our case series lacked the powers of the central banks in more recent 
cases, but they typically received support from the government  in some form . The US 
Treasury injected substantial liquidity into the banking system in five of the six NYCH cases; 
the British government supported the Bank of England in 1847, 1857, and 1866 by 
suspending the statutory limit on its issuance of fiat currency; and, as described in Key 
Design Decision No. 7, Funding Source, the Hong Kong government backed two large private 
banks’ LOLR measures in 1965.  
During financial crises of the National Banking Era  (1863–1913), the NYCH provided 
anonymous temporary lending through CLCs, often alongside the use of other emergency 
tools. These complementary programs most commonly included the suspension of cash 
convertibility of deposits, special bank examinations (often used as a form of stress test), and 
the suppression of member banks’ balance sheet information (Gorton and Tallman 2016) . 
Figure 4 shows the distribution of these additional tools across the six NYCH cases. 
The suspension of cash co nvertibility was illegal, though rarely penalized, and the NYCH 
never officially announced the action (Gorton and Tallman 2018) . These suspensions were 
enforced unilaterally across the NYCH membership and occurred in three of the six surveyed 
crises—in 1873, 1893, and 1907  (Gorton and Tallman 2016; Jacobson and Tallman 2015) . 
In each of those panics, b anks did not deny depositors access  to their funds; rather, they 
issued certified checks to depositors in lieu of legal tender. In September 1873, the NYCH 
announced that all such checks, issued by any member bank, would be certified as “payable 
through the Clearing House” (Gorton and Tallman 2016 , 28 ). Member banks were jointly 
liable for repayment. This action implicitly recognized that banks had p artially suspended 
cash payments to depositors and were satisfying large withdrawals with certified checks 
instead. Banks accepted certified checks  by common consent through the clearinghouse . 
They typically traded at a discount to legal tender (Timberlake 1984). 
In every crisis that we examined, the NYCH also announced a temporary suppression of 
weekly reporting of members’ balance sheet information (Gorton and Tallman 2016; 
Jacobson and Tallman 2015) . Lastly, in five of the six crises, the NYCH organized special 
examinations of member banks (Gorton and Tallman 2016) . In 1873 and earlier crises, the 
NYCH also utilized reserve pooling as a complementary program to CLC issuance ; however, 
it did not do so  again in the National Banking E ra. The action bound the reserves of NYCH 
111
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 29 ---
members into one common pool wherein the NYCH could freely shift reserves between 
banks depending on an individual bank’s liquidity needs (Anderson, Hachem, and Zhang 
2021).  
The NYCH’s interventions in crises also coexisted with separate actions of private banks and 
the US Treasury designed to address the liquidity constraints. In at least two of the six crises, 
private bankers joined together to form loan syndicates, which lent to d istressed NYCH 
member banks (Wicker 2000). Additionally, the Treasury took significant actions to provide 
liquidity to the banks in five of the six crises. In four crises (1873, 1890, 1893, and 1907), the 
Treasury provided liquidity through large bond rede mptions and deposit placements at 
member banks (Cannon 1910; Sprague 1910 ; Wicker 2000 ). In the Crisis of 1914, the 
passage of the Aldrich-Vreeland Act six years earlier gave the Treasury the right to issue up 
to USD 500 million of emergency currency as a lender of last resort. However, as noted, early 
in the 1914 crisis, Congress lifted the USD 500 million cap in response to a request from the 
Treasury (Sablik 2013). The Treasury used its new powers for the first time and issued USD 
386 million of emergenc y currency , of which USD 145 million went to New York City 
(Jacobson and Tallman 2015). 
Similar to actions of the US Treasury during the crises of the National Banking Era, we also 
observe that during several bank panics of the 19th century in the UK, the Exchequer stepped 
in to support the Bank of England’s efforts as a private LOLR. The Bank Charter Act of 1844 
effectively provided the BoE with a monopoly over note issuance and the nation’s gold. The 
Charter Act restricted the issuance of notes not backed by gold to 14 million British pounds 
sterling (GBP; later raised to GBP 17 million).  In 1847, 1857, and 1866, HM Treasury 
authorized the BoE to exceed that limit  if necessary . In 1847, the announcement of that 
suspension, combined with the BoE’s increase in its interest rate to 8 % at HM Treasury’s 
request, brought foreign investors into the market  and “rapidly restored financial stability” 
(Dornbusch and Frenkel 1984) . In 1857, the BoE did exceed the limit following HM 
Treasury’s authorization (Bagehot 1873, 88) . In 1866, the announcement alone was again 
sufficient to calm money markets (Fulmer 2022d). These cases demonstrate that a private 
LOLR can have limitations that can critically hinder its success and may require the backing 
of a government authority to ensure success. 
4. Management: Who managed this facility? What oversight was conducted?  
A high-level board or committee at the LOLR, such as the Fed’s Board of Governors (Fed 
2008b) and the ECB’s Governing Council  (Trichet 2010) , make the key implementing 
decisions—whether to initiate a program ; framing decisions about a program’s  general 
form; the timing of the program; and basic design decisions such as program size, eligibility, 
rates, and acceptable collateral . In the cases involving a private LOLR, the entity’s top 
management also make the implementing decisions regarding BBEL programs. For example, 
in the NYCH cases, once the association made the decision to issue CLCs , it then appointed 
an ad hoc Loan Committee to manage the issuance (Fulmer 2022a). 
Central banks ran 20 of the 33 programs in our survey  as shown on Figure 1 . The LOLR 
function has “traditionally been considered the bedrock function of central banks” (Baker 
112
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 30 ---
2012, 84 –85). Central banks have a unique viewpoint from which to observe market 
developments, such as an increase in interbank interest rates or the shortening of maturities. 
They can add to these observations information gleaned from their supervisory role, in many 
cases, and usage of their standing facilities. The central bank can thus “read” the liquidity 
constraint, analyzing whether there is a panic around one bank, the possibility of contagion, 
or the potential for a systemic event ; consider whether existing programs are adequate to 
address the tensions ; and if not, act accordingly . (See, for example, the discussion at the 
Federal Open Market Committee [FOMC] meeting on August 16, 2007 [FOMC 2008b].) If the 
central bank determines that the market needs assistance, it has the authority to provide 
meaningful support.  
Nongovernment LOLRs, though rare, share some of the observing characteristics of central 
banks. For example, in 19th century London and New York, the BoE—then a strictly private 
institution—and the N YCH, respectively, stood at the center of these significant financial 
centers and were key to their payment systems. This position, and their interconnections 
with many of the banks as counterparties , and, in the case of the NYCH, as members, added 
credibility to their LOLR role when no public alternative existed. 
However, as those cases also demonstrate, we observe certain drawbacks with private 
LOLRs. They did not have an unl imited ability to fund liquidity . The absence of a statutory 
mandate as “keeper of the system” at times impai red their capabilities and overall 
effectiveness. Bias or self -interest may intrude on their decisions. For example, during the 
Panic of 1825, the BoE originally set high standards for the collateral that it would accept for 
loans since it would be bearing  the risk. Although the records are not complete, anecdotal 
evidence suggests that little lending was initially done.  As the panic persisted, the bank 
expanded the scope of acceptable collateral (though still requiring that it be of a “highly 
conservative character”) and dramatically increased its lending, eventually quell ing the 
panic (Fulmer 2022c). 
The fiscal authority worked with the central bank to establish two of the BBEL programs we 
examined. In Norway in 2008 , the central bank (Norges Bank) proposed the Covered Bond 
Swap Program to the Ministry of Finance and then managed the program on the ministry’s 
behalf (Fulmer 2022b) . The government authorized the swap program , set the size of the 
program, and specified which bonds could be swapped for Treasuries and which entities could 
participate (Norges Bank 2008). The Norges Bank made other administrative decisions, such 
as changes and assessments , under a power of attorney from the ministry (Norges Bank 
2008). We found no mention of oversight or reporting responsibilities in public documents. 
However, the program was well used and has been reviewed positively. This collaborative 
model seems to have permitted the fiscal authority to act as the senior partner while relying 
on the administrative expertise of the Norges Bank to fulfill its stated purpose.  
In Hong Kong in 1965, at the request of the government, two large commercial banks, HSBC 
and Chartered Bank, acted as LOLRs to quell runs on local Chinese banks. Both HSBC and 
Chartered Bank offered unlimited support for the affected banks, but deposit withdrawals 
persisted (Jao 1974). As a result, the government introduced several emergency protocols to 
support the currency and to bolster the two banks’ liquidity relief efforts (Jao 1974). The 
113
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 31 ---
government later characterized some of the liquidity support as its own , saying that 
following the emergency supports, it “provided considerable financial support, through the 
media of [HSBC and Chartered Bank] which acted as its bankers, to those adversely affected 
by the run” (Government of Hong Kong 1966, 37). The runs calmed following the emergency 
measures. In this case, the close collaboration between the private LOLR and the government 
in its  willingness to take supplemental efforts appears to have proved reassuring to the 
markets. Relying on this collaboration for all LOLR needs  would be dangerous, however; in 
a systemic crisis, large banks may also be in trouble. 
Special situations may require unusual structures to govern the program management. For 
example, the ECB’s ELA uses a two-tier structure, as shown in the Greece ELA case, the first 
use of ELA acro ss an entire banking system.  ELA allowed the B oG to act as LOLR —to 
temporarily lend to solvent but illiquid institutions headquartered in its jurisdiction at a 
penalty rate—so long as such lending did not conflict with the euro system’s monetary policy 
(ECB 2013; Runkel 2022c). The ECB Governing Council initially approved EUR 50 billion for 
Greece ELA.19 The BoG then administered the program, reviewing individual bank 
applications, although ECB rules dictated some details, such as haircuts. The ECB Governing 
Council also regularly reviewed the Greece ELA in detail to ensure ELA did not conflict with 
Eurosystem monetary policy (Andruszkiewicz et al. 2020; Lee 2016; Pantelias 2021a).  
Determining program details beyond the key implementing level—direct lending or auction, 
acceptable collateral and haircuts, maturity of loans, and rates —is usually up to  the 
program’s administrators, often staff at the LOLR who have experience with such matters. 
See the discussion at Key Design Decision No. 5, Administration.  
At first blush, governance procedures provide a control on the use of BBEL programs, a check 
that the program is being administered as intended and fulfilling its purpose. Very often, the 
implementing entity performs this function . For example, the BoE audited itself and issued 
periodic reports on the programs’ operations. The ECB monitored the national central banks’ 
compliance with the terms of ECB program parameters. If a fiscal authority has participated 
in establishing a program, it may also provide oversight, as when the Ministry of Finance  
reviewed Norway’s covered-bond program.  
Third-party oversight also provides a review on the program’s operations. In  the US, an 
oversight regime overlaid by the legislative body probes the Federal Reserve’s actions and 
the use of its facilities.  In the Russia OBR case, the Russian securities regulat or challenged 
the legitimacy of the OBRs. The attorney general ultimately held OBRs to be illegal (Hoffner 
2022c). 
Funders may also be a source of oversight. In the Hungary Liquidity Scheme, the managing 
authority was the Ministry of Finance, which the government had granted the new power to 
 
19 Although technically the Governing Council does not approve ELA but can only disapprove its issuance once 
notified by the n ational central bank, in practical terms, its administration of the Greece ELA operated as an 
approval. For a detailed discussion of the legal underpinning of the ELA and its application to Greece, see Lee 
(2016). Also see “Applications of Preexisting Emer gency Authorities” in Key Design Decision No. 2, Legal 
Authority. 
114
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 32 ---
make loans to credit institutions. The ministry looked to the central bank , the MNB, and to 
the Hungarian Financial Supervisory Authority (EC 2010)  to perform many of the 
administrative duties and make recommendations to the ministry (EC 2010) . The 
International Monetary Fund ( IMF) and European Commission  funded the loan program . 
Citing concerns over the program’s terms, its risk to public finances, and uncertai nty over 
whether banks would comply with the use -of-funds requirement, the IMF and the EC 
questioned the adequacy of the oversight that Hungary had incorporated into the scheme.  
They made many recommendations for increased oversight and on -sight exams, and  then 
called for additional reviews, audits, and stress tests . However, these measures were not 
“required” as a condition of funding and were only partially implemented. Audits were 
requested but implemented only after loans were repaid (so it is possible that an audit was 
never conducted). Stress tests were required “upon request” from the ECB, but we found no 
evidence of a request having been made. Therefore, this case illustrates that oversight is only 
as good as the enforcement behind it (Mott and Buchholtz 2022). 
Programs in some cases  appear to have had very little oversight . We observe limited 
supervision in three types of situations: (i) the LOLR is a private entity ; (ii) the LOLR is a 
new, decentralized entity ; and ( iii) the LOLR operates in an opaque legal regime. For 
example, in Thailand FIDF, liquidity was extended on a case-by-case basis. No criteria were 
published, the program was essentially secret, and the public responded critically when it 
was later revealed (Prateepchaikul 1997; Runkel 2022d).  
In each of these types of situations, questions arose regarding the effectiveness of the LOLR’s 
administration of the BBEL  program. In situations where oversight  was lacking, the BBEL 
programs suffered from a perception of bias ( the NYCH cases), unclear sta ndards (US RFC 
1932–1933 and the Russia cases ), and secrecy (Thailand  FIDF). These issues are discussed 
further in Key Design Decision No. 5, Administration.  
Note that despite these critiques, some programs with these characteristics were still 
perceived as being effective. So, the lack of oversight or weak oversight may not per se render 
a BBEL program ineffective—although questionable in many ways, the Hungary and Russia 
schemes kept those banking systems afloat  until other measures could be employed to 
stabilize them.  Nevertheless, scholars and practitioners often subscribe to the view that 
oversight and transparency generally improve a central bank’s credibility and lend credence 
to its LOLR activities . “Policymakers should increase transparency about LOLR actions 
through ex ante public hearings and through independent external or internal audit checks 
for decisions on allocation and publication of losses” (Domanski and Sushko 2014, 7).  
5. Administration: How was  this facility administered? Did administration change 
over time?  
Many BBEL programs were administered at a staff level. Administrative details set at this 
level include maturities of loans, collateral, frequency of loan offerings, total amount of each 
offering, terms of auction, and auction mechanism.  
115
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 33 ---
However, such details were not always left to the administrati ve body. The BoG jointly 
administered the Greece ELA with the ECB after the European Commission approved it. ECB 
rules de termined certain lending criteria, including the requirement of an extensive and 
frequent review and approval procedure. For example, ECB guidelines required a penalty 
rate of 100  basis poin ts (bps) to  150 bps above other Eurosystem refinancing facilities 
(Andruszkiewicz et al. 2020; Mourmouras 2017; Suoninen and Jones 2013). Individual Greek 
banks submitted applications for ELA to the BoG, which reviewed the applicant for solvency 
and evaluated collateral quality (Pantelias 2021b, 4:30-5:45), then batched the applications 
and submitted an ELA request to the ECB every two weeks (Runkel 2022c) . To ensure 
compliance with EU parameters regarding monetary policy during the ELA provision, BoG 
officials required daily reports from banks to monitor their liquidity conditions. Cash made 
up a significant portion of the one-third decline in Greek bank deposits, so the BoG delivered 
ELA in the form of banknotes or as a revolving credit line (Pantelias 2021b, 29:23). 
One of the benefits of the administrative details being managed at this secondary level is that 
the staff can quickly adjust them as needed without requiring a new formal determination. 
For these reasons , a LOLR might anticipate the need for flexibility and adopt regimes that 
support adaptability. Preparedness measures can include: 
• Adopting broadly defined BBEL programs as a contingency to be activated under 
specified circumstances (accompanied by a well-defined process for doing so). In 
the UK, the governor of the B oE held the ultimate power to activate the ECTR 
facility in times of stress, although the Monetary Policy Committee and Financial 
Policy Committee provided feedback. Once activated, the BoE set the terms of the 
facility.  
• Enacting statutes that provide broad  guidelines for programs but leave the 
details to the agency’s determination, either through issuing regulations or policy 
statements (as in the Canada cases, for example).  
This type of preset authority has risks , but some of these risks can be neutralize d by 
accompanying oversight and disclosure requirements.  
Another significant benefit of BBEL programs is that they often utilize an existing lending 
infrastructure, which can expedite  operationalization of the program and facilitat e the 
LOLR’s risk management. As shown on Figure 4, 21 of our 33 cases involved programs that 
were formed out of existing programs. In s ome of these cases, the LOLR limit ed eligible 
participants to the bank’s  existing counterparties, in essence designating a “prescreened 
group.” Other programs adopted an existing collateral regime , with haircuts or utiliz ed 
infrastructure that were already familiar to the eligible participants.  For example, by 
adapting an existing process that generally lent for overnight maturities (and could be 
deployed the same day the scheme was disclosed) to also offer longer maturities, the ECB 
was able to announce and settle the first tenders of its FTO program the same day (Runkel 
2022a). 
116
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 34 ---
Programs that adopt new administrative criteria or mec hanisms generally take longer to 
operationalize. However, the possible downside to adopting existing administrative criteria 
and infrastructure is that doing so can limit access to the BBEL program to a certain known 
group of participants or limit the method of operating to one that is familiar, but which may 
not be the best approach in the given situation. When considering the adoption of existing 
criteria, policymakers should weigh the appropriateness of the administrative details of 
BBEL programs against the speed of operationalizing the BBEL program.  
In the Hungary Liquidity Scheme, several agencies participated in administration, with each 
contributing its expertise.  The MNB and the Hungarian Financial Supervisory Authority  
evaluated loan applications  (EC 2010) . The MNB assess ed the institution’s relative 
importance in the financial system and its impact on other institutions, markets, and the 
economy; its short -term liquidity position; and the overall availability of liquid ity in the 
global credit market (EC 2010). The Supervisory Authority assessed the institution’s assets 
and its medium - and long -term liquidity positions. Following evaluation, each authority 
recommended a level of assistance to the Ministry of Finance, whi ch granted the institution 
such aid (EC 2010). 
In several cases, we observe a decentralized administrative structure , which may have 
caused problems. For example, although the US RFC board set general criteria for collateral 
and haircuts, the decentraliz ation of administrative decisions across many regional offices 
may have created inequities and limited confidence in the young agency (Leonard 2022d). 
In modern times, administrative criteria of all types have become more standardized —
originating from a central office—and are more likely to be published. Centralized decision-
making based on publicized criteria promotes consistency. Even so, such decisions can also 
become subject to political pressures, especially in countries with less independent central 
banks (Russia LO) or little oversight (Thailand FIDF).  
6. Eligible Participants : What types of financial institutions were eligible? What 
solvency or viability criteria did they have to meet, if any? 
When acting as an LOLR, central banks must choose the set of eligible counterparties. They 
can maintain the narrow set of counter parties that already have regular nonemergency 
access, usually depository banks, which many authorities agree should have access to BBEL 
programs “so long as they were solvent and viable”  (Domanski and Sushko 2014) . Central 
banks can also include a broader set of nonbank financial institutions. If central banks stick 
with the former, they maintain extensive institutional knowledge from preexisting 
relationships and supervisory activities . On the other hand,  expanding the eligibility 
increases the ability of the central bank to reach a wider swath of the financial system, which 
may also be experiencing distress.  Central banks also must decide how much risk they’re 
willing to take. Will they allow only healthy institutions to participate in the program? Figure 
6 shows the different groups of participants LOLR s selected for their BBEL programs . The 
table also shows whether they conducted solvency or viability tests. 
  
117
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 35 ---
Nonbank Financial Institutions 
Most of our cases do not involve direct participation in central bank facilities by nonbank 
financial institutions  (NBFIs). When central banks provide a LOLR function to banks, the 
central banks typically themselves have the nonemergency responsibility to supervi se and 
regulate the banks. 20 However, they do not regularly do this for NBFIs, which could lead to 
greater risk assumption by the central bank if it were to extend the LOLR function to NBFIs, 
owing to information asymmetries  (Dobler, Murphy, and Radzewicz -Bak 2016) . As 
discussed later in this survey, a central bank might need to perform solvency and viability 
tests to determine if NBFIs can access a BBEL facility, but that assessment is extremely time 
intensive. 
During the GFC, the Bank of Canada found a solution for this dilemma . The BoC sought to 
alleviate pressure on money markets through the introduction of the Term PRA facility for 
private-sector instruments. However, the Bank of Canada  allowed money market 
participants to access the facility only through primary dealers, with whom the central bank 
had long-standing relationships. This occasioned some concern that it possibly stigmatized 
the facility as money market participants had to provide sensitive financial information to 
their competitors, the primary dealers (Zorn, Wilkins, and Engert 2009).  
Some practitioners argue that central bank BBEL regimes should be extended to systemically 
important NBFIs (Domanski and Sushko 2014). The BoC approach is consistent with a 
viewpoint generally held by many authorities: banks should have generous access to central 
bank lending, but NBFIs should “face constructive ambiguity” (Domanski and Sushko 2014; 
Tucker 2014) . “Any decision to lend [should] be made in co nsultation with other 
government agencies and with ex -post consequences for the borrowing firms and the 
regulatory regime” (Domanski and Sushko 2014; Tucker 2014). 
Solvency and Viability Tests 
The central banks in most of our cases did not explicitly require solvency and viability (S&V) 
tests as a condition for BBEL lending. A LOLR can require such tests to minimize the assumed 
risk. However, implementing solvency and viability tests is time-consuming and can induce 
stigma. The question of solvency ar ose during cris es when the NYCH authorize d CLCs. 
Sometimes, the association reviewed the stability of members before or after granting them 
CLCs. However, to avoid stigma, these reviews were private and generally were not disclosed 
to the public. The association also suspended the publication of members’ balance sheet 
information during crises (Fulmer 2022a). 
Under the Hungary Liquidity Scheme, several government agencies cooperated to make a 
viability assessment of potential borrowers (Mott and Buchholtz 2022). The MNB assessed 
 
20 This is not always the case. One notable exception was that in 2008, the BoE was the LOLR, but the Financial 
Services Authority (FSA) was the bank supervisor . This division of authority le d to some delay and missteps 
when Northern Rock needed ELA  and experienced runs , despite the existence of a memorandum of 
understanding delineating the various authorities of the BoE, FSA, and HM Treasury in a financial crisis (House 
of Commons 2008). Northern Rock was later taken over by the government. See HMT/BoE/FSA 2006. 
118
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 36 ---
each institution’s relative importance in the financial system and its impact on other 
institutions, markets, and the economy; its short -term liquidity position; and the overall 
availability of liquidity in the global credit market  (EC 2010) . The Financial Supervisory 
Authority assessed the institution’s assets and its medium- and long-term liquidity positions. 
Following evaluation, each authority recommend ed a level of assistance to the Ministry of 
Finance, which granted the institution such aid (EC 2010).  
During the GFC, the UK Discount Window Facility required on-the-day solvency and viability 
tests for loans to be offered to eligible counterparties  (Winters 2012). This decision led to 
considerable stigma associated with the facility. To this date, no counterparties have drawn 
liquidity from the UK DWF.  
Central bankers generally support access to LOLR lending for solvent banks. However, they 
recognize that distinguishing illiquid from insolvent institutions is not easy and may be 
impossible in times of crisis (Domanski and Sushko 2014; Hauser 2014). As one group of 
central bankers concluded—“First, illiquidity tended to develop into insolvency crises th e 
longer a crisis lasted; second, illiquidity and insolvency were not independent from the 
judgment of the authorities; and, third, solvency assessments by supervisors or analysts 
might be biased” (Domanski and Sushko 2014). Further, a solvency decision depends on the 
value of assets. Assets are likely to be impaired in a crisis when valued at fire-sale prices but 
could regain their value if held and if a liquidity-related failure can be avoided  (Domanski, 
Moessner, and Nelson 2014).  
Foreign Banks 
The majority of the BBEL cases did not provide access for foreign banks. For example, only 
banks majority-owned by Greek entities could access the Greece ELA program (Mourmouras 
2017). This limitation caused a distressed Portuguese bank operating in Greece to approach 
the Portuguese central bank for help rather than the Bank of Greece. The Bank of Greece did 
not lend to the Greece-based branches of a Cypriot bank, which contributed to the liquidation 
of the Cypriot parent bank (Runkel 2022c). In contrast, the US TAF did permit US branches, 
agencies, and subsidiaries of foreign banks to borrow ; these institutions were the largest 
borrower group in terms of amount of funding , accounting for approximately 65 percent of 
all TAF borrowing (Government Accountability Office 2011; Runkel 2022f). 
Changing Eligibility 
Most of the BBEL cases we analyzed do not feature a change in eligible counterparties during 
the facility’s existence. In situations where the LOLR revised the qualifications, it was in the 
direction of widening eligibility, except for one case (Canada Term PRA -PS) in which the 
Bank of Canada removed primary dealers as they already had access to other funding sources 
(BoC 2009; Longworth 2009).  
  
119
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 37 ---
Figure 6: Eligible Participants 
Short-form case name  Eligible institutions Changed during 
intervention Solvency test Viability 
test 
Foreign 
banks Nonbanks 
Canada CT Repo  FIs, NBFIs No No No No Yes 
Canada Term PRA-PS PDs, money market 
and bond market 
participants  
Yes, removed PDs No No No Yes 
(indirectly)  
Canada TLF Major FIs No No No No No 
Canada Term PRA  PDs, major FIs Yes, added FIs Yes No No No 
ECB FTOs Banks Yes (widened national 
flexibility) 
No No No No 
ECB TROs Banks No No No No  No 
Greece ELA Banks No Yes Yes No No 
Hong Kong 1965 Banks No Yes Unknown No No 
Hong Kong 2008 Banks No Yes Unknown Yes No 
Hungary Liquidity Banks, FIs No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Norway Covered Bond Banks, bank-owned 
mortgage companies 
Yes (added mortgage 
companies and savings 
banks) 
No No Yes Yes 
Russia OBR PDs, banks Yes (post-default, 
added banks) 
No No No No 
Russia LO PDs, banks No No No No No 
Thailand FIDF Banks, FIs No No No No Yes 
UK BoE 1825 Banks, FIs No No No No Yes 
UK BoE 1866 Banks, FIs Yes No No No Yes 
UK DWF  Banks Yes Yes (on the 
day) 
Yes (on 
the day) 
No No 
UK ELTR Banks, BS, SD No No No No Yes 
UK ECTR/CTRF Banks, BS No No No No Yes 
UK ILTR Banks, BS, SD No No No No Yes 
US Aldrich-Vreeland Banks, trust 
companies 
Yes (expanded 
eligibility) 
No No No Yes 
US FHLB 1932–1941 Banks, NBFIs Yes (added 
nonmember financial 
institutions) 
No No No Yes 
US FHLB GFC Banks, NBFIs No No No No Yes 
US NYCH 1893 Banks No No No No No 
US NYCH 1914 Banks, trust 
companies 
No No No No Yes 
US NYCH 1873 Banks No No No No No 
US NYCH 1884 Banks No No No No No 
US NYCH 1890 Banks No No No No No 
US NYCH 1907 Banks No No No No No 
US RFC 1932–1933 Banks, NBFIs No Yes Yes No Yes 
US TAF Banks No Yes No Yes No 
US Y2K SLF Banks No Yes Yes Yes No 
US Y2K SFF PDs No No No No No 
Acronyms: BS = building societies; FIs = financial institutions; NBFIs = nonbank financial institutions; PDs = primary dealers, SD = 
securities dealers. 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
120
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 38 ---
7. Funding Source: How did the LOLR fund BBEL operations? 
BBEL facilities have two main sources of funding: central bank balance sheet expansion or 
treasury debt issuance. Interestingly, the BoE’s reserves in the 1800s , when it was still a 
private bank, effectively served as the cash reserves for the whole banking system  because 
banks did not have to meet  reserve requirements as in the US.  One of the key distinctions 
between the two sources for external observers is that treasury debt issuance usually results 
in a public announcement of funding size. However, a LOLR may also announce the size of a 
program even when it is being funded from the balance sheet. Reasons to do this are to 
communicate a size to the problem rather than suggest that it is open -ended. The Fed 
managed this circumstance with the TAF by announcing a set amount for the four authorized 
auctions but also stating that it would consider additional auctions if circumstances 
warranted.  
Several central banks funded their programs through treasury debt issuance: 
• HM Treasury issued almost GBP 50 billion in gilts for use in the UK Discount 
Window Facility, which saw no usage. The Bank of England did not hold these 
gilts unless used in the facility, eliminating the need to pay i nterest on them to 
the government (Fulmer 2022e). 
• The RFC funded its operations through the issuance of debt, which was 
guaranteed by the US federal government. Initially, this issuance could be up to 
only three times the RFC’s subscribed capital, but later legislation raised this limit 
to almost seven times (Leonard 2022d). 
• The FHLB ank System  funded its advances through the sale of consolidated 
obligations of the whole system. At the end of 2009, debt funded 96% of the 
FHLBanks’ consolidated asset portfoli o, with the remaining 4% coming from 
member bank stock subscriptions (Leonard 2022b).  
We observe a few unique situations: 
• Although the Bank of Greece funded Gree ce ELA on its balance sheet, the Greek 
government guaranteed the extended credits (Runkel 2022c). 
• In Hong Kong 1965, a private bank, HSBC, funded some liquidity from its reserves 
but also acted as a conduit for funding that the government provided to certain  
banks (Hoffner 2022a).  
• Across several panics, the NYCH also funded its issuances of CLCs from its  
reserves; members were jointly liable for all CLCs (Fulmer 2022a). 
• In the Hungary Liquidity Scheme, the funding constraint was more obvious. T he 
Ministry of Finance could lend up to 1.1 trillion Hungarian forints (HUF) through 
the liquidity scheme, which was funded with loans from the IMF and ECB (Mott 
and Buchholtz 2022). 
121
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 39 ---
Challenges for Private LOLRs 
Private LOLRs generally fund their activities from their balance sheets. They are limited by 
their reserves, which they cannot voluntarily expand, unlike a central bank. In several cases, 
the private LOLR almost exhausted its reserves.  In the 19 th century, the B oE needed the 
Exchequer to suspend the statutory limits on its issuance of fiat currency to continue lending 
in 1847, 1857, and 1866  (Bordo 1998 ; Dornbusch and Frenkel 1984) . The NYCH faced 
funding constraints that in several cases were alleviated by financial support from the 
Treasury (Fulmer 2022a). In the 1965 Hong Kong case, while the two private LOLRs funded 
loans out of their reserves  and substantial additional deposits that they experienced, the 
government also transferred reserves from London into the Hong Kong banking system to 
provide additional liquidity support for various distressed local banks (FEER 1966; Jao 
1974). In summary, private LOLRs do not have an un limited ability to address systemic 
liquidity shortfalls without gover nment support, and we have no way of knowing if these 
crises could have been calmed without it. 
8. Program Size: Was the program size preannounced? Was it increased? How did 
central banks determine the size of auctions?  
Central banks do not typically announce a predetermined aggregate size of BBEL facilities. 
However, the size of some programs may be limited by legislation, the amount of security 
issuance related to the facility, or the reserves available to the central bank. In only seven of 
our cases was an aggregate program size announced ; in three of these cases, the limit was 
determined by statute (see Figure 7). For example, in approving the Norway Covered Bond 
scheme, the legislature approved a maximum amount for the  program, NOK 350 billion , 
which was funded by the issuance of Treasury bills21 (Fulmer 2022b). 
Central banks that hold auctions or drawings routinely  announce the amount of funds they 
will offer in each operation. In those cases, the size of the auction or drawing is an important 
decision. One consideration is the possible announcement effect of auction size. If a central 
bank makes the auction very large or even unlimited, it can have a strong announcement 
effect but may risk either sending the wrong message —that the situation is worse than it 
is—or creating moral hazard. (As discussed below, we have seen this full-allotment strategy 
employed only in the most critical situations).  
On the other hand, a nnouncing a program that is perceived as inadequate ly sized may also 
impinge on the bank’s credibility and signal that the central bank is out of touch  or not 
prepared to “do what it takes .” In such circumstances, if the size is too small, many bidders 
will not be awarded funds. However, in this case, the central bank has the option to increase 
the size of individual auctions in response to high demand ; increasing the size of auctions 
due to oversubscription or market developments can prove very effective. The BoE, the ECB, 
and the Fed followed this strategy in different ways during the GFC.  
 
21 As of December 31, 2008, NOK 7 equaled USD 1, pursuant to Yahoo Finance.   
122
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 40 ---
The BoE routinely changed the size of the ELTR auctions (UK ELTR), which varied from GBP 
10 billion at announcement to GBP 40 billion at the program’s peak in September 2008 but 
continued to tolerate some oversubscription in this program (Fulmer 2022g). It maintained 
a different strategy with respect to the ECTR facility, which offered GBP 5 billion in each of 
seven auctions but lent a total of only GBP 10 billion due to low demand. Notably, when the 
ECTR was reactivated in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns, the 
BoE preemptively restructured it to be “fixed price, full allotment, in unlimited size” (BoE 
2020). In the first operatio n of this revived program, launched on March 26, 2020 (the day 
lockdown measures legally went into force), the BoE lent GBP 11.1 billion, or more than 96% 
of the facility’s total usage during its second activation (BoE n.d.). 
Beginning in September 2007, t he ECB conducted refinancing operations under the ECB 
TROs program by variable-rate tenders offering between EUR 25 billion and EUR 75 billion 
every two weeks (ECB 2021). In October 2008, when the crisis had escalated significantly, 
the ECB switched to a “fixed -rate, full -allotment” methodology (ECB 2008a) . Participants 
received whatever amounts they requested at a rate set by the ECB (at the policy rate) rather 
than by auction. During this period, the size of allotments varied greatly, driven entirely by 
participant demand. One -year operations commanded hundreds of  billions of euros, while 
some one - and three-month LTROs (long-term refinancing operations) received less th an 
EUR 10 billion in bids. After the introduction of fixed-rate tenders, the operations averaged 
EUR 40 billion (ECB 2021). This demand -driven, “full-allotment” policy combined with the 
longer maturities to ease interbank rates from their highs in the crisis (Runkel 2022b). The 
program provided significant liquidity to the system, with a peak outstanding of EUR 729 
billion. Although the program has some critics, a member of the ECB’s executive board terms 
the fixed -rate, full -allotment policy “the most sign ificant non -standard measure” that the 
central bank implemented (González-Páramo 2011, 4). The Fed viewed the move favorably 
as well (see the discussion at Runkel 2022b). 
Although the Fed did not announce adoption of a fixed-rate, full -allotment policy, it 
eventually adjusted the TAF to that point  in practice. First, it increased auction sizes and 
frequency in response to demand. The TAF operated with a set aggregate amount, which the 
Fed then apportioned between the different 28 -day (and later 84-day) operations. For 
example, in December 2007, the TAF began with a total authorization of USD 40 billion split 
into two 28-day term auctions of USD 20 billion each. By May 2008, the total allotment had 
been increased to USD 150 billion in two 28-day operations of USD 75 billion  each. In July, 
the Fed added a  USD 25 billion 84-day term operation, which it alternated with the 28 -day 
operations. It varied the amounts to stay within the total authorized amount (Runkel 2022f). 
Despite these increases, every TAF auction before October 2008 was oversubscribed, which 
left some bidders underfunded.22  
After the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the aftershock, the Fed increased the size of 
auctions for both maturities beginning on October 6, to a point where it was providing full 
 
22 Oversubscribed auctions were part of the Fed’s stigma strategy, since institutions could not ensure they 
would receive funds. The Lehman bankruptcy and the failure of several other major US institutions 
reprioritized the size of the TAF over its effects on stigma (Runkel 2022f). 
123
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 41 ---
coverage (it continued to set the rate via single-price auction) (Runkel 2022f). The Fed Board 
said it was taking these steps to “reassure financial market particip ants that financing will 
be available against good collateral, lessening concerns about funding and rollover risk” (Fed 
2008c, 1). It maintained these increased sizes, providing full allotment to all bidders, 
effectively mirroring the strategy of the ECB’s TROs (FOMC 2008b; Runkel 2022b) until July 
2009 (Fed 2007–2010). The TAF was one of the most used of all the Fed’s liquidity programs 
during the crisis, with a peak outstanding of USD 493 billion. 
These cases demonstrate that central bank flexibility to increase program size in response 
to demand or market developments can be a very powerful tool, especially in the acute phase 
of a crisis. 
Other Notable Cases 
• The Winters report for the BoE, which reviewed the central bank’s actions during 
the GFC, suggests that utilizing options for standing liquidity facilities could 
lessen stigma for discount windows and incentivize prudent liquidity -insurance 
behavior (Winters 2012). 
• In the case of the UK’s ILTRs, the BoE’s predetermined auction mechanism  
automatically increased the available funding and allocated more liquidity to 
those collateral sets that the submitted bids indicated were experiencing a 
greater degree of stress in funding markets (Fulmer 2022h).   
124
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 7: Program Size 
Short-form case name  Aggregate limit Individual 
auction limit Peak outstanding (or total usage, if not available) 
Canada CT Repo  No No CAD 292 million (USD 223 million) 
Canada Term PRA-PS No Yes CAD 3 billion (USD 2.4 billion) 
Canada TLF No Yes CAD 4 billion (USD 3.2 billion) 
Canada Term PRA  No Yes CAD 37 billion (USD 30 billion) 
ECB FTOs No Yes EUR 95 billion (USD 131.1 billion) 
ECB TROs No Became unlimited EUR 729 billion (USD 1.02 trillion) 
Greece ELA Yes (a) N/A EUR 124 billion (USD 162 billion; first activation) 
EUR 87 billion (USD 95.7 billion; second activation) 
Hong Kong 1965 No Unlimited HKD 163 million (USD 28.2 million; government injections) 
Hong Kong 2008 No Unlimited HKD 11.4 billion (USD 1.5 billion) 
Hungary Liquidity No N/A HUF 690 billion (USD 3 billion) 
Norway Covered Bond Yes, determined by 
legislation 
Yes Total: NOK 230 billion (USD 32.9 billion) 
Russia OBR Yes Unknown RUR 2.3 billion(b) (USD 111 million)  
Russia LO No N/A Total: RUR 136 billion(c)  
Thailand FIDF No N/A THB 434 billion (USD 14 billion) 
UK BoE 1825 No Unlimited Total: GBP 16 million 
UK BoE 1866 No Unlimited Total: GBP 10 million 
UK DWF  No Unlimited Never drawn 
UK ELTR No Yes GBP 180 billion (USD 261 billion) 
UK ECTR/CTRF No Became unlimited Total: GBP 10.8 billion (USD 16.9 billion; first activation)(d) 
Total: GBP 11.5 billion (USD 13.7 billion; second activation)(d) 
UK ILTR No Unlimited GBP 29 billion (USD 36.8 billion) 
US Aldrich-Vreeland Yes, determined by 
legislation → limit 
suspended 
N/A USD 364 million 
US FHLB 1932–1941 No N/A USD 200 million 
US FHLB GFC No N/A USD 1 trillion 
US NYCH 1893 No N/A USD 38 million 
US NYCH 1914 No N/A USD 109 million 
US NYCH 1873 Yes → No Became unlimited USD 22 million 
US NYCH 1884 No N/A USD 22 million 
US NYCH 1890 No N/A USD 15 million 
US NYCH 1907 No N/A USD 88 million 
US RFC 1932–1933 Yes, determined by 
legislation 
N/A First-year total: USD 1.6 billion  
US TAF Yes (e) Yes USD 493 billion 
US Y2K SLF No N/A USD 1 billion 
US Y2K SFF No Yes Options never exercised; USD 481 billion purchased 
(a) Although technically the ECB Governing Council does not approve ELA but can only disapprove its issuance once notified by the national central 
bank, in practical terms, its administration of the Greece ELA case operated as an approval (Lee 2016). 
(b) The only available data for this case provides an outstanding amount of OBRs for end of December 1998. The central bank capped the maximum 
outstanding issues at RUR 10 billion, but it is unclear how much of this was issued. 
(c) The CBR presents this statistic as the total amount of liquidity provided under the Lombard and overnight facilities throughout 1998 (CBR 1999). 
Because of the ruble’s extreme exchange rate volatility during 1998 (including an abandoning of the fixed-exchange-rate regime), an equivalent 
USD conversion is not useful. 
125
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 43 ---
(d) The UK ECTR/CTRF case encompassed two different activations: the BoE launched the first activation on June 15, 2012, and the second on March 
26, 2020. Since the total usage during each activation period lasted several months, we approximate the USD equivalent using the launch dates 
as reference points for the GBP/USD conversion. 
(e) The TAF operated w ith a program total allocated across two -week auction cycles. Initially, the TAF was authorized to auction USD 20 billion 
every two weeks, for a total of USD 40 billion. Between December 2007 and April 2008, the amount offered at each 28-day auction increased to 
USD 75 billion, bringing the program’s total authorization for any cycle to USD 150 billion. When the facility added the 84-day loans in July and 
began alternating between auctions of 28- and 84-day loans, it modified the amount offered in 28-day auctions to maintain an authorized amount 
of USD 150 billion per auction cycle (Fed 2007–2010; Fed 2008b). 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
9. Individual Participation Limits: Did the authorities limit individual participation? 
If so, what was their motivation? 
Central banks must decide if they will limit the amounts each participant  borrows. Such 
limits are often driven by moral  hazard concerns but  can also be a mechanism to ensure 
anonymity and reduce stigma for borrowers . For example, no individual participant could 
take more than 10% of an auction in the US TAF . Because the Fed had set that limit, 
borrowers and other market participants knew that there was broad participation in any 
auction and would be less able to infer the identities of participants (Runkel 2022f). 
If a central bank want s to further constrain participation, it can vary these limits based on 
the type of counterparty. For example, the Canadian Term Loan Facility lowers the maximum 
bid amount allowed as the counterparty’s credit rating decreases below a threshold (Sankar 
2022b). Central banks that conduct auctions in which successful counterparties pay what 
they bid can also implement individual participation limits by capping the number of bids 
allowed. For example, Norges Bank restricted counterparties to three competitive bid s for 
the Covered Bond Swap Program during the GFC (Fulmer 2022b).  
Participation limits may also be motivated by a simple need to preserve program funds. 
When the UK ECTR/CTRF had a fixed supply of liquidity on offer, the Bank of England 
implemented a maximum individual bid amount. However, the Bank of England removed 
this individual participation limit when the facility became unlimited in 2020  (Fulmer 
2022f). The Bank of England did the same for the ILTR facility when it became unlimited  
(Fulmer 2022h).  
10. Rates: How were they set? What was the minimum rate charged? Was the rate set 
by auction? If so, how did the auction work? 
Bagehot’s dictum can be summarized as “lend freely against good collateral at a high interest 
rate” (Bernanke et al. 2020, 57 –58). In the introduction of this paper, we discussed the 
relevance of Bagehot’s advice for modern crises and different crisis phases. In particular, we 
noted tha t the use of penalty rates can be a double -edged sword, particularly during the 
acute phase.  Nevertheless, most LOLRs, historically and in modern times , did structure 
programs to lend at a penalty rate, either through a fixed rate or an auction (applying 
minimums). Some programs cut their rates over time because of poor uptake. For example, 
Canada’s Private -Sector Term PRA received only nominal participat ion until the Bank of 
Canada sharply cut the fixed rate, at which point participation picked up (Sankar 2022a). 
This dynamic also occurred in the Hong Kong 2008 case (Hoffner 2022b).  
126
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 44 ---
Notably, a few programs with penalty rates experienced high usage in the  absence of  
alternatives (Gree ce ELA, US  RFC 1932–1933). In the Russia Overnight and Lombard 
facilities, the CBR fixed lending rates to interest rates that it gradually increased to maintain 
its fixed currency . But this process resulted in the lending facilities freezing up as Russia 
attempted to defend its peg  in a volatile currency market . When the ruble floated, the CBR 
allowed rates to drop. 
Pricing Structure: Competitive Auctions 
As shown in Figure 8, p ricing structures and rates strategies  varied across BBEL programs. 
Many central banks choose to use auctions to administer their BBEL operations, as doing so 
allows market forces to determine rates and prevent moral hazard. Using an auction also 
helps to neutralize stigma associated with LOLR borrowing in that borrowing at an auction 
can be seen as simply borrowing at a market -determined rate, not at a penalty rate  
(Bernanke et al. 2020, 57–58). Further, in the event of a lea k of borrowers’ identities, many 
names would be divulged at the same time, providing  some protection to individual 
borrowers (Hauser 2014).  
For the US TAF, the Fed set a minimum bid that was below the market rate for interbank 
loans (the London Interbank Offered Rate, or Libor) but above the overnight indexed swap 
(OIS) rate (Runkel 2022f). In practice, bids consistently settled at the minimum bid rate. The 
low minimum created an arbitrage opportunity. By December 2008, the Fed had beg un 
paying 0.25% interest on excess reserve balances (Fed 2008d). Banks could borrow from the 
TAF and then lend the Fed its own money at a profit. To avoid such arbitrage, in January 
2009, the Fed switched the minimum bid rate from the OIS rate to the interest rate on reserve 
balances (Fed 2009).  
If using a competitive auction, designers must decide which rates successful bidders will pay. 
Under discriminatory pricing, successful bidders pay what they submitted as their bid. Under 
uniform pricing, every successful bidder pays the same price, with a variety of mechanisms 
for setting this single price. 
Central banks do not often discuss the reasoning behind their choice of auction methodology. 
Therefore, we cannot easily discern why one chooses discriminatory pricing while another 
chooses a uniform pricing mechanism. In general , discriminatory pricing and uniform 
pricing present different benefits in theory and practice: 
One argument for discriminatory pricing is that, if the goal of the auction is to get an 
honest valuation from bidders, discriminatory-price models are more likely to produce 
this result, since, in the uniform-price model, bidders tend to use steeper bid curves than 
their true valuations support. Furthermore, in both theory and practice, collusion tends 
to be reduced in discriminatory pricing . . . The argument for uniform pricing, however, 
is that, since discriminatory-pricing bidders know they will pay the full bid amount, they 
will bid less than their true valuations so as to be better off when they win. These lower 
bids imply that bidders are creating much flat ter bid curves than their true valuations. 
Maximization of central banking revenue, therefore, will not be realized. (Kronick 2016) 
127
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 45 ---
Further, auction mechanisms have the added benefit of providing the central bank with 
pricing information from the market, which is not supplied in a fixed-rate regime.  
One auction methodology about which we do have significant information is for is the UK 
ILTR program . The UK designed this program to be flexible and responsive to market 
conditions during stressed times . It utilized a product-mix auction—“a first in central bank 
auction design” (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011) . Participants could place any number of 
bids (spreads over the Bank Rate) on any of two, then three collateral sets (differentiated by 
quality from narrow to wider). The BoE determined a clearing spread for each collateral set, 
which then determined the rate for all borrowers. In utilizing this uniform-pricing structure 
for ILTR operations , which differed from the discriminatory -pricing mechanism used for 
ELTR operations , the B oE explained its decision as wanting to remove the incentive for 
counterparties to underbid relative to their actual financial situations (Fulmer 2022h).  
In each ILTR operation, the Bank of England first allocated funds to the wider collateral and 
then to the narrower collateral set. It placed no restrictions on the aggregate value of bids or 
the total amount that could be allocated to a single participant  (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 
2011). According to a BoE staff paper: 
Expressing the bids as spreads to Bank Rate eliminates the interest rate risk arising from 
unexpected movements in Bank Rate. Moreover, the spread the Bank charges to lend 
against wider collateral relative to narrow collateral and the proportion lent against 
each collateral set are determined within the auction (as the degree of market stress 
increases, the clearing spread on wider collateral relative to narrow collateral would be 
expected to rise . . .). Finally, from the pattern of the bids, the Bank obtains a signal about 
the need to expand the overall size or frequency of future operations. (Fisher, Frost, and 
Weeken 2011, 4) 
Each ILTR operation ha d two built-in adjusters. First, the amount of liquidity available 
increased automatically if demand rose; and second, a greater proportion of funds was lent 
against a particular collateral set as the clearing spread for that collateral set increased 
relative to the other collateral sets (BoE 2014; Fulmer 2022h). 
  
  
128
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 46 ---
Figure 8: Auction Prevalence and Pricing Strategies  
Short-form case name  Rate set by auction  Type of pricing (a) 
Canada CT Repo  No Fixed rate 
Canada Term PRA-PS Yes Discriminatory 
Canada TLF Yes Uniform 
Canada Term PRA  Yes Discriminatory 
ECB FTOs Yes (two exceptions) Discriminatory auctions; fixed rate = ECB main refinancing rate  
ECB TROs Yes → No Discriminatory auctions; fixed rate = ECB main refinancing rate  
Greece ELA No Fixed rate = ECB main financing rate + 100 bps–150 bps premium 
Hong Kong 1965 No Overnight market rate 
Hong Kong 2008 No Fixed rate = base rate + premium  
Hungary Liquidity No High premium on top of either IMF SDR rate(b) or interbank rate 
Norway Covered Bond Yes Uniform 
Russia OBR Unknown Unknown 
Russia LO No Fixed rates tied to exchange rate of ruble (very high at the time) 
Thailand FIDF No Fixed rate = repo funding plus a premium of 100 bps–250 bps 
UK BoE 1825 No Fixed at BoE base rate 
UK BoE 1866 No Fixed at BoE base rate 
UK DWF  No Fixed rate = BoE base rate + variable premium based on type of 
collateral and size of drawing  
UK ELTR Yes Discriminatory (not indexed to Bank Rate) 
UK ECTR/CTRF Yes Uniform in first iteration (minimum rate = Bank Rate + 25 bps); 
fixed rate (BoE base rate + 15 bps) in second iteration 
UK ILTR Yes Uniform in first iteration (indexed to Bank Rate); fixed rate (BoE 
base rate + 0 bps – 15 bps) in second iteration 
US Aldrich-Vreeland No Fixed rate; escalated the longer emergency currency was held 
US FHLB 1932–1941 No Variable rate, set in a decentralized manner 
US FHLB GFC No Variable rate, set in a decentralized manner 
US NYCH 1893 No Fixed rate 
US NYCH 1914 No Fixed rate 
US NYCH 1873 No Fixed rate 
US NYCH 1884 No Fixed rate 
US NYCH 1890 No Fixed rate 
US NYCH 1907 No Fixed rate 
US RFC 1932–1933 No Fixed rate, set above the Fed’s discount window rate 
US TAF Yes Uniform 
US Y2K SLF No Fixed rate = target federal funds rate + 150 bps 
US Y2K SFF Yes Uniform for auction; strike price = either 150 bps or 250 bps 
above the target federal funds rate 
(a)Definitions: Uniform: Every successful bidder pays the lowest accepted bid. Discriminatory: Every successful bidder pays 
their individual bid. Fixed rate: Every participant pays the same rate established by the administrator, fixed to either a 
stationary percentage or a fluctuating market rate. 
(b) The Special Drawing Right (SDR) is an interest-bearing international reserve asset created by the IMF in 1969 to 
supplement other reserve assets of member countries (IMF 2021).  
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
129
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 47 ---
Pricing Structure: Fixed Rates 
Many of the BBEL facilities in our survey  utilized a fixed -rate pricing structure. While 
administratively simpler than an auction, a fixed -rate facility risks both overpricing—
leading to stigma and little usage —or underpricing—leading to moral hazard and overuse. 
This challenge is  unavoidable for bilateral facilit ies without auctions, such as on -demand 
facilities like the UK DWF facility. Although it was in part designed to address stigma in the 
UK’s standing facility (the equivalent of  the Fed’s discount window), the UK DWF’s high 
penalty rate contributed to its lack of usage throughout its existence, some observers argue, 
rendering it a “very extreme backstop for banks” (Winters 2012) . The DWF facility also 
charged counterparties more for larger requests.  
Another BoE program illustrates a similar situation with a different outcome. The Bank of 
England offered four term-repo auctions with expanded collateral sets in the autumn of 2007 
at a penalty rate, w ith no takers . When the BoE later reformatted these op erations as the 
ELTR facility, it removed the penalty rate and the facility saw plenty of usage  (Cheun, von 
Köppen-Mertes, and Weller 2009; Fisher 2009). This outcome demonstrates the importance 
of rate-setting in BBEL facilities, especially when using a penalty rate. A central bank can 
price itself out of the market, temporarily impeding its lender-of-last-resort programs.  
In the US during the GFC, use of FHLBank advances was elevated. FHLBank advances offered 
attractive rates at longer maturities than the Fed’s discount window , which suffered from 
stigma (Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame 2008) . The discount window was unused even after the 
Fed initially lowered its interest rates in hopes of mitigating the stigma (Ashcraft, Bech, and 
Frame 2008). 
A fixed rate also can function as part of an exit strategy. When the market rates drop, banks 
are less likely to continue to seek out the central bank lending  if the fixed rate becomes 
unattractive. See the discussion at Key Design Decision No. 20, Exit Strategy. 
Unlimited Facilities 
Sometimes, central banks switch to a fixed rate in connection with providing a full allotment 
to interested counterparties. For e xample, the ECB changed the pricing of TROs from 
discriminatory to fixed after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Rather than deciding 
individual auction sizes, the ECB preferred to set a fixed rate and provide a full  allotment 
(Runkel 2022b).  
In another example, within weeks after  the Lehman bankruptcy , the Fed doubled the 
authorized TAF amount to all bidders to USD 300 billion and increased auction sizes 
dramatically, to USD 150 billion each. This allowed all bidders to effectively receive the full 
allotment of all amounts bid for. Parties received funding at the minimum bid rate set by the 
Fed rather than at a rate determined by comp etitive auction (Runkel 2022f). We observed 
this shift away from a penalty rate to a lesser rate only in the most critical circumstances. 
130
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 48 ---
11. Collateral: What assets were eligible? Was this parameter changed? How were 
haircuts determined?  
When extending liquidity to banks, LOLR s usually require each borrower to present 
collateral to secure the loan; indeed, many central banks are required by law to only lend on 
a secured basis. The LOLR has several decisions to make regarding collateral in designing a 
BBEL program. What is the group of eligible assets that may be presented as collateral? Will 
this be a narrowly defined or a broadly defined group? Collateral decisions can reflect the 
LOLR’s intent behind the program, and they are likely to impact the program’s accessibility 
and usage. If the program defines collateral too narrowly, usage may be limited, stifling the 
program’s effectiveness. If the program defines eligible collateral too broadly, then , 
depending on market conditions and the other terms of the program, borrowers may use it 
opportunistically. Figure 9 describes the range of collateral used in our cases. 
In 16 of our 33 cases, we classified the range of eligible collateral as narrow, although in some 
case this range was expanded. We see a LOLR choosing a narrow set of collateral when it is 
targeting assets that either are not eligible under existing programs or have become illiquid. 
The latter situation  was the impetus for the Canada TLF, which accepted only CAD-
denominated non-mortgage loan portfolios that had become relatively illiquid as collateral 
for loans of 26–30 days. Overall, across the four Canadian BBEL programs that we consider, 
the idea was to match the collateral eligibility of the central bank’s Standing Liquidity Facility 
across two facilities (Term PRA + TLF), but lend at longer terms, and separately to support 
money and bond markets (Term PRA-PS). The regular Term PRA was the most used facility, 
and its collateral was the most aligned to the SLF (Sankar 2022b).  
 
Similarly, “in order to facilitate banks’ access to long-term funding,” Norges Bank established 
the Norway Covered Bond scheme, which originally loaned government securities only in 
exchange for covered bonds backed by residential and commercial mortgages and municipal 
loans—in other words, assets that had become illiquid (Norges Bank 2010). 
Some programs use narrow collateral requirements to focus on a particular participant 
group. The FHLB ank System, established in the US in 1932, provides an example. The  
legislature established an entirely new agency to provide liquidity to banks and financial 
institutions that provided mortgages and limited the collateral that the FHLBanks would 
accept to mortgages and related securities (Leonard 2022a).  
The Canada PRA -PS also was limited as to both collateral and participants. Originally, it 
permitted large participants in the money markets and primary dealers to secure loans with 
specified instruments common in that industry, c ommercial paper, and other investment -
grade money market securities . In a second iteration of the Canada PRA -PS, money market 
participants and bond market participants were eligible, and had to bid through primary 
dealers, which coul d no longer bid on their own behalf.  (The primary dealers  remained 
eligible for the regular Term PRA [Zorn, Wilkins, and Engert 2009]). The collateral eligibility 
for the Term PRA -PS was widened to include investment -grade corporate bonds  (Sankar 
2022a). Overall usage of the PRA-PS (and TLF) was less compared to facilities that accepted 
broader collateral. However, establishment of the Term PRA for PS (and TLF) was consistent 
131
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 49 ---
with the BoC’s intent to provide liquidity broadly. The low rate of participation may suggest 
that Canadian financial institutions were able to obtain short-term funding from other, more 
cost-effective sources (Zorn, Wilkins, and Engert 2009).  
 
A LOLR will often follow the collateral polices of its conventional standing liquidity facilities 
(for example, the US discount window) when establishing new programs; doing so provides 
administrative ease as rules are already established. Fourteen of our 33 cases reference 
some existing standard schedule of collateral.  
In August 2007, at the beginning of the GFC, the ECB implemented the ECB FTOs and ECB 
TROs, which expanded opportunities for overnight and term lending, respectively. Under  
these programs, the eligible collateral was originally limited to the types acceptable under 
the ECB OMO Unified Framework—euro-denominated marketable debt securities, 
nonmarketable bank loans, and retail mortgage-backed debt (Runkel 2022a; Runkel 2022b). 
However, in October 2008, the ECB significantly enhanced its liquid ity provision by (i) 
swapping the auction feature of both facilities to fixed rate, full allotment; and (ii) expanding 
the eligible collateral widely to also accept debt instruments denominated in US  dollars, 
pounds, and yen; certificates of deposit ; subordinated marketable debt instruments ; 
syndicated loans; and asset-backed securities (Runkel 2022a; Runkel 2022b). 
In some cases, a central bank’s standing facility accepts a wide range of collateral and using 
its schedule may indicate intent to provide broader access and flexibility. For example, the 
BoE introduced the ECTR in 2011 and activated it in 2012. This facility accepted the same 
collateral as its Discount Window Facility, providing additional options for the use of the 
widest set of collateral eligible in the Sterling Monetary Framework, for overnight and term 
lending (Fulmer 2022f) . Togeth er, the ECTR and DWF provided maximum flexibility for 
borrowers to use the widest set of collateral eligible for overnight and term loans. The Fed’s 
Y2K programs, US Y2K S FF and Y2K SLF , also adopted a broad range of collateral from its 
standing facilities (Leonard 2022e; Leonard 2022f).  
The benefit of a wider collateral set is that it provides more options to a borrower for how 
to deploy its assets. For example, in the GFC, although the US TAF accepted a broad range of 
collateral, studies show that borrowers pledged large amounts of relatively risky and illiquid 
assets: commercial loans, asset-backed securities (ABS), mortgage-backed securities (MBS), 
and residential mortgages. They pledged much smaller amounts of their safest assets , US 
Treasury bills and government bonds, presumably because they could use these elsewhere  
(Fed 2007–2010). This demonstrates that establishing a wide class of eligible collateral does 
not guarantee that borrowers will use the full range of assets for the program. Another 
similar example occurred at the NYCH during a number of panics. The NYCH accepted a range 
of collateral—“bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities” —for CLCs (OCC 1907, 
66). However, reports confirm that the majority of collateral delivered was much narrower: 
commercial paper, commercial loans, US Treasuries, and gold certificates (Fulmer 2022a). 
In eight of our cases, the LOLR expanded the set of eligible collateral once the program was 
implemented. Norway’s 2008 covered -bond program, which originally accepted only 
covered bonds secured by housing mortgages, expanded in January 2009 to accept covered 
132
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 50 ---
bonds secured by commercial loans or loans to the central government or a local government 
(Fulmer 2022b) . Notably, the original authority and the circular explaining the swap 
program provided for the possibility that Norges Bank could expand the eligible set of 
collateral beyon d covered bonds secured by Norwegian residential mortgages to include 
covered bonds secured by other types of assets, as well as any other bonds secured by 
Norwegian mortgages (Norges Bank 2008). 
The BoC’s Term PRA facility presents a particularly interest ing case in which the Bank of 
Canada first expanded and then contracted eligible collateral. At its introduction, the Term 
PRA Facility accepted a narrower range of collateral than that of the Bank of Canada’s 
Standing Liquidity Facility. In September 2008, the BoC then expanded the Term PRA to 
include all collateral eligible at the SLF at the time. In December 2009, as market conditions 
improved, the Term PRA eliminated eligibility of BBB corporate bonds and certain ABCP 
securities (Sankar 2022a).  
The Depression-era RFC extended the types of collateral it accepted to boost demand from 
borrowers, without formally revising the stated list of eligible collateral) . The RFC had 
discretion under the law to accept a broad range of collateral, but in practice, it chose at first 
to accept only a narrower range, similar to what was the n eligible at the Fed’s discount 
window23 (Anbil and Vossmeyer 2017) . This collateral policy was perceived as too 
restrictive and impeding the use of the facility. Once the agency broadened the collateral it 
accepted, the failure rates on RFC loans decreased. (They had been high because , having 
deposited their high -quality collateral with the RFC, some borrowing banks had difficulty 
raising additional funds to meet depositor withdrawals. The loosening of collateral 
requirements improved their overall borrowing capacity.) (Mason 2001a).  
Given the incidence of central banks expanding collateral under BBEL  programs, drafting 
programs that provide some flexibility at the administrative level to widen the eligible 
collateral may be useful.  
Separate Lending Facilities Based on Collateral 
LOLRs may separate lending into distinct facilities  based on collateral type and apply 
haircuts according to those categories. However, we were unable to identify the motivations 
behind those decisions, and they may have been made simply for ease of administration.  
However, in one program, the separation of collateral clearly served a direct policy purpose. 
In the UK Indexed Long -Term Repo operations , the Bank of England created two separate 
pools of collateral to employ discriminatory pricing for repo auction. Participants could bid 
against a narrow set of collateral (traditional government securities) or a wide set (less 
 
23 The Fed’s discount window accepted gold; Treasury securities; and commerci al, industrial, and agricultural 
paper. The RFC’s decision to base its collateral eligibility on the discount window reflected the influence of Eugene 
Meyer, the governor of the Federal Reserve Board and chairman of the board of the RFC. However, after slo w 
utilization and Meyer’s exit, the RFC “relaxed” and broadened the eligible collateral it accepted, although we were 
unable to determine the parameters of the wider practices (Leonard 2022d). 
133
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 51 ---
liquid, high quality debt securities), or submit paired bids for both pools.24 The Bank imposed 
the same haircuts used in its LTR operations for the narrow set , while imposing higher 
haircuts on the wide set that varied depending on type, rate, and maturity of collateral.  By 
offering bidders these choices, t he ILTRs allowed banks to submit more sophisticated bids 
that more closely resembled their funding needs. Since cutoff prices, especially for the wider 
set of collateral, rose during times of systemic stress, the auctions provided the BoE with an 
“early warning indicator” (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011, 9). Haircuts varied depending on 
security type, maturity, and interest rate. Own -name covered bonds, introduced in the 
second iteration, received an additional haircut of 5% (Fulmer 2022h). 
Special Situations  
The Russia, Thai land, and Gree ce cases are unusual in that the LOLR accepted collateral of 
dubious credibility. The Central Bank of Russia issued and accepted its own legally 
questionable bonds (OBRs) as collateral to restart interbank lending , which had stopped 
because of the government’s default on some of its bonds (Hoffner 2022c).  
Greek bonds had also defaulted, and the ECB lending facilities no longer accepted them. The 
BoG accepted Greek sovereign bonds, regardless of cr edit rating or maturity, in addition to 
other collateral accepted under ECB open market operations, to prop up the value of eligible 
collateral held by domestic banks for typical monetary policy operations. The BoG also 
applied various haircuts to the collateral, some steep, and required that borrowers pay a fee 
for a government guarantee of all loans (Runkel 2022c).  
The Thai FIDF loosened its collateral criteria and made some unsecured loans. These 
practices eventually led to the government ’s absorbing lo sses to save the financial 
institutions it sought to help (Runkel 2022d).  
Under Hungary’s Liquidity Scheme  in the GFC , the central bank, MNB, also extended 
uncollateralized loans, but borrowing banks had to commit to secure external funding and 
maintain corporate lending exposures in Hungary. Participants that defaulted on loans 
needed to submit restructuring or liquidation plans to the European Commission within six 
months (Mott and Buchholtz 2022). 
These unusual cases demonstrate the range of creativity that central banks are capable of in 
critical situations. But they also caution that in such dire situations, a central bank should 
take extra efforts to secure itself.  
 
24 Later, in 2014, the BoE revised the program, creating three separate collateral pools for three separate auctions: 
Level A, a narrow set (high -quality, highly liquid government securities); Level B, a wider set (high -quality liquid 
collateral such as sovereign, supranational, mortgage, and corporate bonds); and Leve l C (less -liquid securities 
including own-name securities and portfolios of loans) (Fulmer 2022h).  
134
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 52 ---
Figure 9: Eligible Collateral 
Short-form case 
name Scope (a) Notes on eligible collateral (b) Basis or range of 
haircuts (c) 
Canada CT Repo N A, B–Securities issued or guaranteed by the Canadian government Standing Liquidity Facility 
Canada Term  
PRA-PS 
N→M  Highly rated bankers’ acceptances, CP with < 1 year to mature, and 
highly rated ABCP; later added corporate bonds 
N/A 
Canada TLF N Non-mortgage loans not already used as collateral in the domestic 
payments system  
40% 
Canada Term  
PRA(d) 
M→W A, B–Securities issued or guaranteed by Canadian government and 
certain bankers’ notes, then all assets eligible under Standing Liquidity 
Facility: later removed eligibility of BBB corporate bonds and certain 
ABCP 
Standing Liquidity Facility 
ECB FTOs N→W ECB OMO Unified Framework, then added debt instruments 
denominated in USD, pounds, and yen; certificates of deposit; 
subordinated marketable debt instruments; syndicated loans; asset-
backed securities  
OMO Unified Framework + 
8% on non-euro collateral + 
asset classes varying from 
5%–15% 
ECB TROs  N→W ECB OMO Framework, then added debt instruments denominated in 
USD, pounds, and yen; certificates of deposit; subordinated marketable 
debt instruments; syndicated loans; asset-backed securities 
OMO Unified Framework + 
8% on non-euro collateral + 
asset classes varying from 
5%–15% 
Greece ELA (e) W ECB OMO Framework and any Greek sovereign debt regardless of 
credit rating. Greece moved through three separate haircut schedules 
from 2012–2015 
OMO Unified Framework + 
15%–71% for Greek 
sovereign debt + 23%–81% 
for private debt 
Hong Kong 1965 W Mortgageable assets, securities, foreign balances, and secured advances 
 
Unclear if discounted 
Hong Kong 2008 N A, B–The enhanced discount window accepted Hong Kong government 
Treasuries and added US Treasuries. The discretionary term lending 
facility also accepted other investment-grade securities 
DW 
Hungary Liquidity(f) U Lending was uncollateralized N/A 
Norway Covered 
Bond 
N→M Covered bonds backed by residential mortgages; later expanded to 
include covered bonds backed by Norwegian loans to, or guaranteed by, 
central or local governments or commercial mortgage loans, and CB-
backed commercial mortgages, including those denominated in six 
currencies 
Varied by collateral type; 
+ 10% added to foreign 
currency collateral 
Russia OBR (g)
  
N Bank of Russia Bonds (OBRs) None 
Russia LO (g)  N Russian government securities; replaced by OBRs after default Unclear 
Thailand FIDF N→U Thai government bonds, then added promissory notes from finance 
company debtors and unsecured loans 
Unclear 
UK BoE 1825 N Bills from commercial transactions in goods that were endorsed by two 
London bankers and no longer than 65 days; added bills up to 95 days 
and government securities 
Unclear but discounted 
UK BoE 1866 N Bills of exchange (unsecured debt) endorsed by two “good British 
parties” 
Unclear but discounted 
UK DWF W A, B, C, D–The widest set of eligible collateral  DW margin ratios + 3% for 
non-sterling collateral and 
5% for own-name securities 
UK ELTR M→W A, B, C - Originally A and B; later added corporate and consumer loans, 
ABCP, and bank bonds. Securities could be denominated in sterling and 
seven other currencies 
Established a margin 
schedule separate from 
other OMOs + 3% for non-
sterling collateral 
UK ECTR/CTRF W A, B, C, D–Same as UK DWF Sterling Monetary 
Framework 
UK ILTR M→W A, B, C, D–Originally A and B; later added C and D. Securities could be 
denominated in sterling and seven other currencies 
Sterling Monetary 
Framework 
135
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 53 ---
Short-cut case 
name Scope (a) Notes on eligible collateral (b) Basis or range of 
haircuts (c) 
US Aldrich-
Vreeland  
W Any security, including CP, held by a national currency association, but 
CP could be no more than 30% of borrower’s capital and surplus 
23% for state and municipal 
bonds to 44% for 
warehouse receipts 
US FHLB  
1932–1941  
N/U Initially only home mortgages; the FHLBanks also made some 
uncollateralized loans 
Varied based on maturity 
and loan-to-value ratio 
US FHLB GFC  N MBS and related assets, US Treasuries (USTs), agency securities, and 
community development loans. Some uncollateralized loans supported 
by stock subscriptions 
Varied based on maturity 
and loan-to-value ratio 
US NYCH 1893 (h) W Bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities Minimum 25% haircut 
except for USTs, at par 
US NYCH 1914 (h) W Bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities Minimum 25% haircut 
except for USTs, at par 
US NYCH 1873 (h) W Bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities Minimum 25% haircut 
except for USTs, at par 
US NYCH 1884 (h) W Bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities Minimum 25% haircut 
except for USTs, at par 
US NYCH 1890 (h) W Bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities Minimum 25% haircut 
except for USTs, at par 
US NYCH 1907 (h) W Bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities Minimum 25% haircut 
except for USTs, at par 
US RFC 1932–1933  N Despite broad discretion to accept various types of collateral, the RFC 
originally only accepted collateral similar to the Fed DW (gold; 
Treasury securities; and commercial, industrial, and agricultural 
paper). After slow utilization, it “relaxed” and broadened eligible 
collateral in unspecified ways 
20%–50%, depending on 
quality 
US TAF (i) W A, B, C, D–Same as discount window; significant use of commercial 
loans, ABS, MBS, and residential mortgages; fewer USTs 
DW schedule + extra 100% 
cushion reduced to 33%  
US Y2K SLF W A, B, C–Same as discount window Standard DW schedule 
US Y2K SFF  N A–Options could be exercised for Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
(FRBNY) repos using typical collateral, but expanded to include agency 
securities, USTs, and “stripped” bonds of other government agencies 
Standard FRBNY OMO repo 
schedule 
(a) This column represents the authors’ attempt to classify the range of collateral that was eligible as (N) narrow, (M) moderate, or 
(W) wide. (U) indicates programs that offered uncollateralized lending. 
(b) We use the following categories to indicate the range of eligible collateral: 
• Level A: High-quality sovereign debt. 
• Level B: High-quality securities that normally trade in liquid markets, including: other sovereign and central bank debt; 
major international institutions’ bonds; Group of Ten (G-10) government-guaranteed agency bonds; government-guaranteed 
bank debt; US agency debt; prime residential mortgage-backed securities; regulated covered bonds; asset-backed securities 
backed by credit cards, auto loans, student and consumer loans; and portfolios of senior corporate bonds and commercial 
paper issued by nonfinancial companies.  
• Level C: Illiquid but transferable securities, including commercial mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed commercial 
paper, and securitized portfolios of corporate bonds.  
• Level D: Own-name securities and loans, including residential mortgages; consumer, commercial real estate, and corporate 
loans; own-name securitizations; and covered bonds (Winters 2012).  
(c) Where we identified that an existing schedule was used for the haircuts, we list it. “Unclear” indicates we were not able determine 
the basis for haircuts.  
(d) The Canada Term PRA applied individual collateral concentration limits (based on collateral source) per participant.  
(e) The Greece ELA was funded through the ECB, and it used the ECB OMO collateral and haircut schedule. It also accepted Greek 
sovereign debt, which at the time, ECB lending facilities did not accept. Originally, the BoG applied haircuts on Greek sovereign 
debt, which ranged from 15% to 71%, depending on the maturity and coupon of the bond. In December 2014, the BoG lowered 
haircuts to a range from 6.5% to 52.5%. After February 2015, the BoG applied a uniform haircut rate of 45% for all Greek debt 
regardless of the bond’s maturity and coupon (Runkel 2022c). 
(f) Given the unusual circumstances of the Hungarian crisis, the MNB extended credit on an uncollateralized basis against a 
commitment to procure external funding and maintain domestic lending exposures. 
(g) In August 1998, the Russian government defaulted on its ruble-denominated Treasury bonds (GKO-OFZs) maturing before 2000. 
Before the default, these securities had been the primary collateral instrument banks used at the CBR’s lending facilities. 
136
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 54 ---
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Haircuts 
In 32 of our 33 cases the LOLR required that lending be secured ; however, in two of these 
cases, the LOLRs also made some unsecured loans. Only the Hungary Liquidity Scheme made 
exclusively unsecured loans, which the government guaranteed under a previously 
announced program. I n all but three of our cases, we found evidence that it applied a 
haircut.25 A few themes emerge from our cases. 
Standard Collateral Frameworks  
When a LOLR borrows or references a standard collateral schedule for a program, it generally 
applies the haircuts listed in that schedule as well. This is an efficient way to work with 
information that is known to the LOLR and likely participants. Thirteen cases, from five central 
banks (BoC BoE, ECB, Federal Reserve, and HKMA), borrowed collateral and haircut schedules 
from their standard collateral frameworks or from a standing facility, such as a DW.  
For example, the US TAF accepted collateral that could be used at the discount window and 
applied haircuts from that schedul e. These collateral rules were regularly administered by 
the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which managed the TAF so it could quickly 
and efficiently assess and value collateral deposited for TAF borrowings and implement TAF 
auctions (FOMC 2007a; Runkel 2022f). 
Although, in some of these instances, the bank tweaked the haircuts that it applied, this 
frequency seems to imply that the banks value d their well-thought-out schedules and only 
in limited cases saw reason to “start from scratch .” An example of the latter case was the 
Canada TLF, in which the Bank of Canada applied a uniform 40% haircut to the program’s 
narrow set of eligible collateral, non-mortgage loans (BoC 2008a).  
Despite the efficiencies of using an established collateral haircut schedule, the schedule 
might not be the most appropriate in some circumstances. After all, central banks set these 
schedules during normal market conditions, whereas a liquidity constraint can easily disrupt 
the underlying assumptions and cause collateral to quickly lose value and become illiquid.  
When an existing schedule is inappropriate, the LOLR can take steps to adjust haircut s for 
certain classes of collateral. This alteration can be done by adding premiums such as for 
 
25 In Hong Kong 1965, Russia OBR, and Thailand FIDF, we could not find evidence to show that a haircut was 
applied (Hoffner 2022a; Hoffner 2022c; Runkel 2022d). In the Russia OBR case, the central bank likely did not 
apply a haircut when accepting its own OBR bonds as an alternative collateral under its lending facilities when 
the Russian government bonds defaulted.  With respect to Thailand, the absence of hair cuts may have 
exacerbated the situation and contributed to losses the FIDF suffered.  
Beginning in September 1998, the CBR issued zero-coupon Bank of Russia Bonds (OBRs) as eligible collateral instruments 
through which banks could secure CBR loans (Hoffner 2022c; Hoffner 2022d). 
(h) The NYCH accepted a range of collateral, generally defined as “bills receivable, stocks, bonds, and other securities” (OCC 1907). 
However, banks primarily collateralized CLCs using commercial paper and commercial loans (Fulmer 2022a; OCC 1873).  
(i) In addition to standard haircuts, the TAF initially required banks to provide a collateral cushion equal to 100% of the value of 
collateral for the duration of the bidding process; the Federal Reserve eventually reduced the collateral cushion to 33%, however, 
and required banks to keep the cushion on deposit for the duration of the loan (Fed 2008b; FOMC 2008a). 
137
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 55 ---
collateral denominated in a foreign currency, as discussed below. The LOLR can also adjust 
how the collateral is valued while keeping the haircut the same; this too would provide 
additional security to the LOLR, but we did not observe this in any of our cases. Third, the 
LOLR can require an overcollateralization cushion, as the US did under the TAF. 
Haircut Premiums 
In six of our cases, the LOLR applied an additio nal haircut, above the schedule haircut , to 
certain classes of collateral. For example, the ECB applied its OMO Unified Framework of 
haircuts to collateral under the ECB FTOs and the ECB TROs facilities but applied an 
additional 8% haircut for non-euro-denominated collateral (USD, pound, or yen). Norway 
similarly applied an additional 10% haircut for collateral denominated in a foreign currency 
under the Norway Covered Bond facility. The BoE applied an additional 3% to its Discount 
Window Facility margin ratios for collateral not denominated in Sterling but in any of seven 
other currencies. Central banks apparently were comfortable with a fixed premium haircut 
across foreign currencies because they accepted only collateral denominated in a limited 
number of high-quality currencies.26 
We identified several other situations in which haircut premiums were applied: 
• Norges Bank also applied additional haircuts of 2%–5% for pools of floating-rate 
bonds in lieu of a “top -up” clause based on maturity.  See Fulmer 2022b for a 
discussion of this feature. 
• The UK DWF applied an additional 5% haircut on own-name securities (Fulmer 
2022e). 
• ECB FTOs and TROs required additional haircuts for certain types of expanded 
collateral when the central bank  adopted a fixed -rate full -allotment regime in 
October 2008:  
o An additional 5% haircut on debt instruments issued by credit institutions 
traded on specific nonregulated markets;  
o An additional 10 %–15% haircut on subordinated debt instruments 
guaranteed by financially sound guarantors; and 
o An additional 5% haircut on marketable securities rated lower than A- but 
at least  BBB-, except for asset -backed securities (ECB 2008b; Runkel 
2022a).  
 
26 For the Norway program , covered bonds backed by Norwegian residential and commercial mortgage loans 
could be denominated in Swedish kron or, Danish krone r, euros, US dollars, British pounds, or Swiss francs 
(Norges Bank 2009a).  
138
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 56 ---
• The US TAF required an overcollateralization cushion for its longer -term loans. 
This cushion was initially equal to 100% of the value of collateral after haircuts 
were applied, effectively doubling the amount of collateral borrowers needed. In 
July 2008, the Fed reduced the size of the collateral cushion to 33% but mandated 
that banks keep the cushion on deposit for the duration of the loan  after 
discovering that many participants withdrew the cushion immediately after 
receiving TAF loans (FOMC 2008a; Fed 2008a).  
Fairness and Uniform Application 
One of the benefits of using a published schedule of collateral and haircuts is that it creates 
a sense of fairness and equity if uniformly applied.  This has become a standard operating 
practice of many modern central banks , as noted earlier and as indicated in Figure 9. 
However, where the criteria are not clear or uniformly applied , the integrity of  the facility 
and/or the LOLR can be impaired. Such was the case of the US RFC, established during the 
Great Depression to provide liquidity to banks that were not eligible to borrow from the Fed. 
The RFC home office prescribed stringent collateral policies and haircuts . However , the 
valuation of collateral was done at regional field offices , which led to subjective and varied 
results. The unaccommodating collateral practice undermined the effectiveness of the 
liquidity intervention and corresponded with increased rates of failures amongst borrowers 
before requirements were relaxed (Leonard 2022d).  
12. Loan Duration : What were the maturities of the BBEL loans? Were maturities 
extended? 
A frequent effect of a liquidity constraint is that maturi ties will shorten . For that reason , a 
common strategy that LOLRs employ is to provide funding for longer maturities. In some 
instances, this may be done by retaining a short loan term and rolling over the loan. This was 
a practice the central bank followed in Russia LO. Several market participants criticized the 
CBR’s unconventional use of the overnight facility in the post-default period (Rao 1998). 
A more frequent practice is for central banks to add specific maturities to their loan 
programs, whether offered as direct loans or auctions. In the case of direct loans, a program 
may offer one term or more than one term, which the participant may select. During the GFC, 
the HKMA enhanced its discount window by permitting banks to request loans with one- and 
three-month maturities, in addition to overnight (HKMA 2008b). Figure 10 shows the range 
of maturities offered under our cases. 
In the case of auctions, loans of specific terms are delineated so participants can bid on the 
maturities they desire. For example, the ECB TROs auctioned loans with terms of one, three, 
six, and 12 months (Runkel 2022b). 
Another interesting case is the US TAF, which initially auctioned only 28-day loans. This term 
brought the maturity of the new facility close to the max imum term on discount  window 
loans, the facility for which it was designed to substitute (FOMC 2007a). In July 2008, the Fed 
began also offering extended term loans of 84 days (DW loans had been extended in March) 
(Fed 2008a; Fed 2008b; FOMC 2008a). FOMC officials expressed concerns about the  
139
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 57 ---
increased credit risk that the longer maturities posed to the reserve banks. For that reason, 
the program required overcollateralization of the loan s, to be maintained throughout the 
term of the loans (Armantier, Krieger, and McAndrews 2008).  
Risk is a common concern with respect to longer loans. The US RFC initially kept loans to less 
than six months, although it frequently rolled over loans , despite its legal authority to loan 
for periods of up to three years. The shorter terms enabled the RFC to have greater control 
over borrowers, a factor that bothered some banks (Mason 2001b). The Bank of England 
addressed risk a different way in its UK DWF program, which initially offered 30-day loans. 
It later introduced 364-day loans, with an additional fee of 25 bps (BoE 2009). 
Throughout our cases, LOLRs show a commitment to be flexible about the maturities of loans 
offered and to make changes as market conditions evolve. LOLRs offered extended terms in 
other ways: 
• The Norway Covered Bond program offered four maturity options between three 
months and three years, and later expanded the maximum term to five years. 
Norges Bank announced the size of the amount at each auction but reserved the 
right to distribute the total auction amount across the different swap periods 
within each auction , following an assessment of all the bids received  (Norges 
Bank 2008; 2009b). 
• With one exception, the NYCH issued its CLCs without a maturity date; the 
certificates were redeemable at the borrower’s discretion. Arguably, as market 
interest rates returned to normal, the CLC rate would become unattractive , 
prompting redemptions (Fulmer 2022k). 
In connection with the century date event, the Y2K SLF optioned repo s that could be 
exercised for overnight, two-, three-, four-, or five-day loans during certain periods (FRBNY 
1999).  
  
140
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 58 ---
Figure 10: Maturities  
Short-form case name  Maturities 
Canada CT Repo  One month 
Canada Term PRA-PS Two weeks (first iteration); one to three months (second) 
Canada TLF One month 
Canada Term PRA  Two weeks and one month (first iterations); one month (second); one and three months 
(third iteration); later added six and 12 months 
ECB FTOs No fixed maturity: in practice, all were overnight except one six-day maturity 
ECB TROs One, three, six, and 12 months 
Greece ELA Undisclosed: varied according to borrower’s needs, generally short term 
Hong Kong 1965 Undisclosed: varied according to borrower’s needs 
Hong Kong 2008 Overnight, one and three months (DW); up to one month; later revised to three months 
(discretionary term lending) 
Hungary Liquidity  Maximum of three years; one-third of each loan eligible to receive a four-year maturity 
Norway Covered Bond Four maturity options between three months and three years; later expanded to a 
maximum of five years 
Russia OBR One month and three months 
Russia LO Maximum of one month, shortened to seven days or less; CBR often rolled over 
outstanding loans beyond maturities 
Thailand FIDF Undisclosed: funding structure tied to seven-day repos 
UK BoE 1825 Maximum of 65 days; later allowed bills in excess of 95 days for discount 
UK BoE 1866 Uncertain: typically bills of 65-day maturities 
UK DWF  Maximum of 30 days; later added 364 days 
UK ELTR Three months 
UK ECTR/CTRF Six months (first activation); three months (second); later adding one month 
UK ILTR Three months and six months; later only six months 
US Aldrich-Vreeland None; issued without an expiration date 
US FHLB 1932–1941 Short-term (a few days to a year) or long-term (one year to 10 years) 
US FHLB GFC One day to 30 years 
US NYCH 1893  None; redeemable at the borrower’s discretion 
US NYCH 1914  None; redeemable at the borrower’s discretion 
US NYCH 1873  First issuance, two months; subsequent issuances, none; redeemable at borrower’s 
discretion  
US NYCH 1884  None; redeemable at the borrower’s discretion 
US NYCH 1890  None; redeemable at the borrower’s discretion 
US NYCH 1907  None; redeemable at the borrower’s discretion 
US RFC 1932–1933 Despite authorization to make loans of up to three years, the RFC initially restricted 
loans to less than six months, although it frequently rolled over loans 
US TAF 28-days; later added 84-day loans 
US Y2K SLF Until program expired: up to four months 
US Y2K SFF Overnight, two-, three-, four-, five-day 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
141
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 59 ---
13. Other Conditions: Did BBEL programs impose other conditions on borrowers? 
Most of the cases in the BBEL case series did not contain significant other conditions attached 
to lending . BBEL programs need to be rapidly implemented  and broad-based. They are 
typically conducted by central banks outside political influence.  
Although many BBEL programs involved the transfer of cash liquidity to counterparties, the 
Discount Window Facility in the UK involve d a securities swap. In return for eligible 
collateral, the Bank of England provide d counterparties with gilts, a type of government 
security. One of the conditions attached to this lending was that counterparties could not 
simply turn around and use these gilts at other Bank of England facilities to gain access to 
cash liquidity (Fulmer 2022e). This additional condition related to concerns about monetary 
policy transmission . See Key Design Decision No. 14, Impact on Monetary Policy 
Transmission. 
14. Impact on Monetary Policy Transmission: Did the BBEL programs affect monetary 
policy transmission, an d did the central bank respond with sterilization 
measures? 
In the majority of the BBEL programs studied in this series, central banks did not publicly 
detail the potential effects of the lending facilities on monetary policy. In general, BBEL 
programs are  small relative to the scale of monetary  policy operations.  Furthermore, 
emergency-lending policies are conceptually distinct from monetary policy: in the former, 
the government is typically exchanging reserves for risky collateral (altering the total supply 
of safe assets); while in the latter , the government is typically exchanging reserves for safe 
government collateral (leaving the total safe -asset supply unchanged) . This is why private 
LOLRs are at a disadvantage to government LOLRs, because they cannot unilaterally expand 
the money supply. Nevertheless, enough overlap  exists between emergency lending and 
monetary policy to cause some concerns, especially if the BBEL programs are large.  
The Bank of England noted that ELTR operations injected “extra liq uidity” into the banking 
sector, which impacted the central bank’s ability to determine monetary policy . To reduce 
its excess reserves, the BoE created a one -week Bank of England bill, remunerated at the 
Bank Rate  (Fisher 2009) . At its peak, the Bank sold GBP 100 billion in one week during 
January 2009 to drain excess reserves from the banking system and regain control of 
monetary policy (Cross, Fisher, and Weeken 2010). 
Instead of sterilizing the Term PRA’s effect on monetary policy, the Bank of Canada decided 
in April 2009 to shift the facility to also conduct monetary policy . It did so  by setting the 
minimum and maximum bid rates to the target rate and the Bank Rate, respectively. Bank of 
Canada researchers specifically refer to this change occurring at the “effective lower bound,” 
demonstrating the possible need for combining liquidity provision for financial stability and 
monetary policy when rates approach zero (Zorn, Wilkins, and Engert 2009, 9).  
The European Central Bank fo llowed a “separation principle” for many years, in which 
monetary policy and liquidity management were pursued separately, with different tools. 
The ECB maintained this stance through the early stage of the GFC. However, the ECB 
142
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 60 ---
abandoned the separation pr inciple later in the GFC, as interest rates approached the zero 
lower bound. A counterfactual exercise in 2019 by the ECB showed that the separation 
principle weakened the effect of the ECB’s supplementary longer -term refinancing 
operations (SLTROs). The exercise shows that liquidity management and monetary policy 
may have complementary, positive effects on each other when combined in the same tool 
(ECB 2019). 
15. Other Options : Did the LOLR consider other options before implementing the 
BBEL program? 
For many of the BBEL programs covered in this series, we find no public indication that the 
LOLR considered other options instead of the implemented facility. However, we do know 
that the Fed FOMC considered other options that might make the discount windo w more 
attractive to address the strain  in bank funding markets before adopting the TAF in 
December 2007: 
These options might include (1) a temporary reduction in the spread between the 
primary credit rate and the target federal funds rate; (2) the adoptio n of a term credit 
program, under which term credit could be extended, potentially at a lower rate than 
the primary credit rate, at a borrower’s initiative; and (3) the adoption of a term auction 
facility (TAF) at which term discount window funds would be auctioned at the System’s 
initiative. (FOMC 2007b, 5) 
Ultimately, the FOMC decided to adopt the TAF because it presented several advantages, 
even though  the auction format did not guarantee that any firm would win funds in an 
operation: 
The TAF has several  advantages relative to the other two options. First, it would allow 
the Federal Reserve to retain close control over the supply of reserves because we would 
determine the auction amounts —at least assuming that the minimum bid rate is not 
binding. Second, the facility arguably has a better chance of avoiding stigma . . . Third, 
each auction would reveal information about the strength of the demand for funds. 
Finally, a TAF could also have potential longer -run benefits for managing reserves and 
conducting mo netary policy both in routine circumstance s and in circumstances of 
financial stress. (FOMC 2007b, 6-7) 
These similar options would be available to other central banks as possible options.  (Also 
see Key Design Decision No. 3 , Part of a Package, for a discussion of actions undertaken by 
the LOLRs contemporaneously with the BBEL programs.) 
16. Similar Programs in Other Countries  or Jurisdictions: Did multiple jurisdictions 
introduce similar BBEL programs at the same time? 
Earlier BBEL cases focus on unique programs that did not involve international coordination, 
in part because financial systems were much less interconnected in prior centuries. 
However, in every case except 1884 (when the crisis and bank failures were largely confined 
143
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 61 ---
to New York City ) (Hoffner 2022e), several clearinghouse associations in cities other than 
New York also issued CLCs (Bagehot 1873, 88). 
Recent financial crises, such as the GFC, have highlighted the significant changes in the 
world’s financial systems and how interconnected they have become . As a result, central 
bank responses, including BBEL programs, have been more coordinated than they had been 
in previous times. In the late 1990s, significant shared consultative efforts were undertaken 
in preparation for the century end date (Y2K) event, with several international groups of 
central banks meeting to share ideas (Leonard 2022e; Leonard 2022f). Governments and 
central banks also pushed out a large number of similar support programs acr oss much of 
the globe in early 2020 in response to the impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic lockdowns 
(YPFS n.d.1).  
In the GFC, however, we have recently witnessed the most extensive cooperation among 
central banks. Several major central banks announced programs at the same time during the 
GFC to address pressures in short -term funding markets, project confidence , and settle 
market stress. For example, on December 6, 2007, the following actions were announced in 
unison, with each central bank linking to the others’ press releases: 
• The Bank of Canada announced the temporarily expansion of the list of securities 
eligible for Term PRA transactions (BoC 2007); 
• The Federal Reserve announced the creation of the TAF , which would auction 
term funds to depository institutions against the wide variety of collateral that 
could be used to secure loans at the discount window , and the creation of swap 
lines with the European Central Bank (up to USD 20 billion) and the Swiss 
National Bank, or SNB (up to USD 4 billion) (Fed 2007);  
• The ECB announced two USD liquidity-providing operations, in connection with 
the US T AF, against ECB -eligible collateral for maturit ies of 28 and 35 days  
(Sveriges Riksbank 2007); 
• The Swiss National Bank announced that it had entered into a currency swap 
agreement with the Fed and would offer a USD repo transaction of up to USD 4 
billion against SNB -eligible collateral , in the form of a variable -rate tender 
auction that would provide funds for 28 days . The action was intended to 
facilitate the US dollar funding of SNB counterparties in the Swiss repo system  
(SNB 2007); 
• The Bank of England increased the total amount of funding offered in upcoming 
long-term repo OMOs from GBP 2.85 billion to GBP 11.35 billion and widened the 
range of acceptable collateral (BoE 2007); and  
144
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 62 ---
• While not announcing new programs, the Bank of Japan and the Sveriges 
Riksbank (Sweden) also issued press releases endorsing the actions of the other 
banks and indicating that that they were closely monitoring the situation vis-à-
vis their domestic banks and would be ready to provide liquidity if appropriate 
(Sveriges Riksbank 2007; Bank of Japan 2007). 
The coordinated actions of seven major central banks evidenced a recognition by the banks 
of the interconnectedness of the financial systems and the need for a coordinated response  
and demonstrated the willingness of central banks to work together to address the 
burgeoning crisis. Although each central bank developed its respective actions, the ECB and 
SNB established their measures in cooperation with entering into US dollar  swaps with the 
Fed—in a “package deal” —which allowed the ECB and SNB  to provide US dollar lending 
downstream to their domestic banks  (FOMC 2007b, 17) . For a time , the ECB and SNB 
auctions were coordinated with the TAF auctions (Runkel 2022f). In September, the Fed also 
entered into swaps with the other four banks from the December 2007 announcements, and 
ultimately, the Fed was party to 14 swap  agreements (Wiggins and Metrick 2020). In 
October, six major banks took the highly unusual step of jointly announcing a reduction in  
their policy rates by 50 bps (Kahn and Meade 2016).  
As the crisis persisted into the chronic phase, the various central banks undertook differing 
strategies, rolling out a plethora of programs to address the various effects their systems 
were experiencing, notably in Europe, the sovereign debt crisis. In spite of this divergence,  
we find evidence that the major central banks continued to share information and meet with 
one another through mediums such as the BIS Basel Committee and Group of 20 conferences, 
and that overall, these efforts have been considered very successful (James 2013; Kahn and 
Meade 2016; Van Der Weide 2020). 
17. Communication: How did the LOLR communicate its program? What does this tell 
us about its objectives for the program?  Do the  communications evidence a 
commitment to transparency? 
In general, when introducing a BBEL program , a central bank is usually rather circumspect 
in characterizing the reasons behind the program or the precipitating circumstances ; we 
highlight in Figure 11 those circumstances where communications were notable for one 
reason or another. Announcement of a BBEL program usually included a reference to the 
general problem the BBEL program was designed to address. The most common, cited by 31 
of 3 3 cases, was that general liquidity stresses were occurring in the funding markets, 
constraining lending among the financial institu tions and onward lending to the real 
economy. (See discussion at Key Design Decision No. 1, Purpose, and Figure 2.) Other reasons 
cited with some frequency were to relieve stress related to a particular collateral class or to 
respond to , or prevent,  bank run s. However, particularly because BBEL  programs are 
activated at the beginning of panics and are intended to calm them before they develop into 
full-blown crises, the concern about saying too much, and the constraining style of 
communication, seems appropriate. At the early stages of a panic, known facts are often 
limited and fast changing, and the risk of sparking additional panic is considerable.  
145
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 63 ---
Even gi ven these concerns , communications should be clear and consistent and convey a 
sense of confidence from the LOLR, to promote confidence in the LOLR and in its ability to 
make good on its promises. When there is high confidence in a LOLR’s credibility and 
capabilities, the announcement of a BBEL program itself can have a powerful signaling effect 
and calm a run, even if the program is not utilized. For example, Canada’s Term Loan Facility 
and private-sector Term PRAs saw little usage, unlike the earlier Term PRA, but BoC officials 
believed the announcement and availability of the two programs “helped to mitigate 
uncertainty among market participants about the availability of liquidity” (Longworth 2010, 
6). In 1866, the announcement that the government would allow the Bank of England to issue 
notes beyond the statutory limit , if necessary, immediately calmed bank runs, and the B oE 
did not have to follow through with the measure (Fulmer 2022d). However, see Key Design 
Decision No. 8, Program Size, for further discussion. 
  
146
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 64 ---
Figure 11: Notable Communications  
Short-form case name Notable communications  
Canada CT Repo  N/A 
Canada Term PRA-PS Required publishing of Subparagraph 18(g)(1) notice of “extraordinary transactions” 
Canada TLF N/A 
Canada Term PRA Required publishing of Subparagraph 18(g)(1) notice of “extraordinary transactions” 
ECB FTOs N/A 
ECB TROs N/A 
Greece ELA The BoG and ECB slowly abandoned constructive ambiguity and became more transparent 
Hong Kong 1965 The announcement that HSBC (the private LOLR) agreed to extend an emergency loan to a 
failing Chinese bank temporarily halted a deposit run. However, runs on the bank resumed 
after HSBC stated that its emergency lending would not be unlimited. Even though HSBC 
again renewed its pledge of unlimited support, inconsistent communication undermined the 
effectiveness of the LOLR efforts and government emergency protocols were required to 
calm the runs. 
Hong Kong 2008 N/A 
Hungary Liquidity Announced with amendment of the Act on Public Finances, which adopted the authority for 
the program. Delayed communication to EU regarding State Aid review 
Norway Covered Bond Norges Bank published three circulars defining the swap program, as well as the auction 
schedules 
Russia OBR The CBR did not publicize a lot of the lending details and specifics. Did not allow the public to 
understand who was eligible for the lending, which led to speculation of political favoritism 
Russia LO Same as OBR 
Thailand FIDF The FIDF did not disclose the existence of the program or support until after 50+ finance 
companies were suspended 
UK BoE 1825 N/A 
UK BoE 1866 N/A 
UK DWF  The Bank of England first announced the DWF in a consultative paper and officially 
established it with a market notice on October 20, 2008 
UK ELTR The Bank of England first announced the ELTRs on December 12, 2007, but did not initially 
refer to them as an established program. 
UK ECTR/CTRF The BoE announced the program in December 2011, and it was activated six months later 
with an announcement stating that it was “designed to respond to actual or prospective 
market-wide stress of an exceptional nature” (BoE 2012)  
UK ILTR The Bank of England released market notices announcing the auction schedule and changes 
to the program and communicated directly with counterparties to educate them on the 
innovative auction design 
US Aldrich-Vreeland The Treasury secretary conducted active communication to project confidence, since this 
was the first usage of the emergency currency 
US FHLB 1932–1941 N/A 
US FHLB GFC The significant uptick in borrowing during 2007–2008 was not announced or publicly 
reported by the FHLBanks but was disclosed in regular reports filed with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (because of debt raising) and in public annual reports filed by the 
FHLBanks Office of Finance. 
US NYCH 1893 The NYCH reported on the program in the financial press. On October 31, 1893, the Loan 
Committee submitted an internal report to the association including “full and complete 
statistics of the transactions with each bank” (Sprague 1910, 412) 
US NYCH 1914 The NYCH reported on the program in the financial press 
US NYCH 1873 The NYCH publicized its decision to issue CLCs in the local financial newspapers and held a 
public meeting to discuss the plan 
US NYCH 1884 The NYCH reported on CLC operations via articles in the New York Times and financial 
market magazines 
US NYCH 1890 The NYCH publicized some CLC borrowers’ identities in the financial press 
US NYCH 1907 The NYCH does not appear to have made a concerted communications effort with respect to 
the issuance of the CLCs 
US RFC 1932–1933 President Hoover stated that the purpose of the RFC was to increase broad employment, 
rather than to aid “big industries or big banks” (Leonard 2022d). The program was targeted 
to small banks and employers, which were not eligible to borrow from the Federal Reserve 
147
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 65 ---
US TAF Fed communication increased after the FOMC decision to establish the TAF. In the early 
stages, communications and lending activity were coordinated with other major central 
banks, which were also providing liquidity in domestic currency as well as USD liquidity 
(through currency swaps) 
US Y2K SLF For primary dealers—part of a multiyear plan to avoid issues at the century date change. The 
program was announced in July 1999, prior to the SFF 
US Y2K SFF For banks—part of a multiyear plan to avoid issues at the century date change. The program 
was announced in August 1999 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Successful commun ications are clear about the goals of the program, send consistent 
messages, and portray the authorities as competent and decisive.  Where this has not 
occurred, for instance, where the communications have been confusing or uncertain, results 
have been negative. For example, in Hong Kong in 1965, HBSC, a private bank operating as 
LOLR at the behest of the government, announced that it would make an emergency 
temporary loan to a local Chinese bank that was suffering a run. The announcement halted 
the run. But the runs on the Chinese bank resumed after HSBC issued a clarifying statement 
that its emergency lending would not be unlimited. Following the controversy, HBSC and the 
other private LOLR bank (Chartered Bank) issued clear statements ensuring the availability 
of unlimited liquidity ; however, runs on Chinese banks continued  (Hoffner 2022a) . The 
inconsistent communications undermined the effectiveness of the LOLR efforts , and 
government emergency protocols were required to calm the runs (Hoffner 2022a). 
The few instances among our cases w ith significant  communications announcing BBEL  
programs tended to be for novel programs, rather than merely a new iteration of an existing 
program. One example is the UK ILTR program, which encompassed an innovative auction 
methodology, launched as part of its revamp of liquidity programs following the GFC. In this 
circumstance, extra effort was undertaken by the BoE to facilitate greater understanding and 
acceptance of the program, which involved participa nts possibly submitting  multiple bids 
against one or more of three collateral sets determined by quality and paying different rates 
for loans against each (BoE 2014). Bank staff also published a white paper on the program’s 
first-year experience (Fisher, Frost, and Weeken 2011). 
Ideally, high standards of communication should be maintained throughout the life of the 
program and across any amendments and extensions. BBEL programs are often initiated at 
the beginning of panics and amidst changing circumstances, so they are often mod ified and 
amended as circumstances change or to make the program more accessible. Such 
communication should be well  thought out to avoid announcement clutter and minimize 
confusion. One way of doing this is for the LOLR to announce a range of modifications , or to 
preposition possible additional changes. For example, when broadening maturities, the LOLR 
could state that it may also add additional maturities as circumstances warrant. Then , if 
needed, the additional maturity can be offered through an administrative decision without the 
need for additional amendments to the program. This also gives the LOLR the ability to act in 
a prospective manner based on changing information and to not always be in reactive mode. 
  
148
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 66 ---
A Note about Constructive Ambiguity 
A second option for a LOLR to consider is to define and publish a liquidity framework before 
it is needed. A theory among central bankers  is that one way to address moral hazard is 
“constructive ambiguity” about the availability of emergency liquidity , the argument being 
that if the circumstances under which the central bank will provide liquidity are unclear, 
banks are unable to ga me around o r rely on such support  (Winters 2012) . Constructive 
ambiguity is intended to also preserve the central bank’s discretion to provide or withhold 
such support and on what terms (Lee 2016).  
In practice, central banks (and public authorities responsible for f inancial crisis 
management) were reluctant to set out their approaches to ELA because of concerns 
about serious moral hazard and adverse effects on market funct ioning. B y end -2006, 
about half of the central banks of the G10 advanced economies had publicly released 
statements on their ELA policies. Generally, these statements set out broad guidelines 
or principles for ELA. Many central banks, particularly in the euro area,  were 
deliberately vague about their ELA policies, emphasizing the importance of constructive 
ambiguity. (Domanski, Moessner, and Nelson 2014. 5)  
However, the argument for this view seems to have waned in light of the experiences of many 
central banks during the GFC, with respect to banks at least. In the UK, ambiguity 
surrounding the circumstances and terms of emergency liquidity does not appear to have 
been effective in limiting moral hazard pre -crisis and led to  excessive swings in market 
expectations about the B oE’s willingness to lend  (Hauser 2014) . Post-crisis, the B oE, 
following recommendations from several official reviewers, “concluded that the LOLR 
regime should be richly specified, and embedded in a large ly public framework”  (Hauser 
2014, 81). Officially, the BoE rejected constructive ambiguity: “The Bank will ensure that the 
Sterling Monetary Framework remains one of most transparent regimes globally” (BoE 
2013, 9). 
Tucker (2014) has also promoted this pr actice to increase certainty and address issues of 
time consistency that arise when the LOLR has to make decisions regarding the provision of 
liquidity as the crisis is developing. Hauser advocates for the same: “Published facilities send 
a clear signal to  the markets, government and the public of what the bank will and will not 
do, channeling expectations and allowing banks to plan accordingly. Clearly, for this to be 
effective the commitments in the framework need to be credible” (Hauser 2014, 87). See the 
discussion of the UK ECTR at Key Design Decision No. 2, Legal Authority, on “Applications of 
Preexisting Emergency Authorities” for an example of an emergency facility adopted by the 
BoE as a contingency and activated six months later. 
The central bank can avoid the negative signaling  effect of activating a facility by having 
liquidity insurance facilities permanently available and setting out ex  ante the terms under 
which the central bank would expect to lend. And greater knowledge of the terms of central 
bank liquidity insurance allows banks to factor this into their planning and take out what 
they see as an appropriate level of self -insurance, consistent with having the central bank 
insurance available to help manage the extreme “tail” risks that might arise. 
149
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 67 ---
A Note about Timing 
As discussed, poor communications create a lack of credibility around the LOLR and its BBEL 
programs. This includes situations where a long delay  persists between the announcement 
and implementation of a program . This timing can erode market confidence in the 
availability of the liquidity support and raise questions of bias. Thus, one important decision 
made at the management level is consideration of when to announce the program. In the best 
scenarios, the announcement of a liquidity program can have a positive “announcement 
effect,” which itself serves to calm the panic, even before there is much  use of the program. 
As noted above, this positive effect occurred with respect to Canad ian programs during the 
GFC (Sankar 2022c). And in the UK in 1866, the announcement from the government that it 
had suspended the Bank Charter Act and would permit the BoE to issue notes above the legal 
limit (requiring that they be backed by gold) had a calming effect (Fulmer 2022d). 
A similar result occurred with respect to the Fed’s two liquidity programs introduced before 
the Y2K century date change event , the Y2K SLF and , in particular, the US Y2K SFF.  See 
Leonard (2022e) and Leonard (2022f), respectively. In the August 24, 1999, FOMC meeting, 
committee members anticipated that “the greatest impact [the SFF] could have is the 
announcement effect . . . it would be a measure of success of the program if very few of these 
options were exercised” (FOMC 1999). In fact, none of the USD 490 billion of options were 
exercised, indicating that the program primarily functioned by easing anxieties around the 
century date change. 
Credibility is not the only consideration regarding the timing of an announcement. Liquidity 
constraints ebb and flow. A central bank may decide that a program is necessary but then 
tensions may relax.  Announcing the program after the tension has subsided can be 
interpreted as a sign that the tensions are expected to return.  However, one option that the 
central bank has is to delay adopting and publicly announcing the program. It can be held in 
abeyance and deployed later if changed circumstances warrant. This is what occurred with 
the Fed’s TAF, which was originally considered  by the Fed Board in September 2007. 
Conditions improved , and the Fed decided to delay adoption and announcement of the 
program until December (Wiggins and Metrick 2020).  
Central banks are also well advised to complete all the work to set up a program behind the 
scenes before announcing the initiative because, although the announcement of some 
programs has a positive lifting effect, this  result is not guaranteed. History has shown that 
not delivering liquidity when expected can cause a negative reaction from the market.  For 
example, in 1866, when the BoE refused assistance to Overend-Gurney, the largest discount 
house in London, Overend-Gurney suspended payments to its creditors, a major run ensued 
among London’s banks, and use of the BoE’s discount window surged27 (Fulmer 2022d). The 
panic only subsided once the BoE swiftly changed course and began to lend freely.  
 
27 Although a run was ignited, there is also some ev idence that some industry leaders agreed with the BoE’s 
decision not to lend to Overend-Gurney because they thought it was insolvent. This decision has also been 
analogized to the Fed’s decision in 2008 not to lend to Lehman Brothers. (For further discussi on of the role of 
solvency in BBEL programs, see Key Design Decision No. 6, Eligible Participants, Solvency and Viability Tests ).  
150
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 68 ---
When confusion ensues, counterparties may pull back from lending and conserve cash, in 
essence, self-protecting. This activity may also be accompanied by a rush to the LOLR for 
liquidity. To avoid such negative reactions, announcements should be clear and detailed and 
should be made in close proximity to the operational availability of the program. This timing 
will also facilitate the greatest impact from the BBEL program, which is especially desirable 
since they are first responses with the ability to quell the liquidity constraint.  
18. Disclosure: Did the program release data at the transaction level or only on an 
aggregate basis? Did the program release data on a delayed basis? 
Disclosure policy requires balancing two important concerns: ( i) providing information to 
the taxpayers and the public about the use of government funds, and ( ii) protecting 
borrowers from p ossible negative stigma reactions. In this section , we discuss the ways 
LOLRs in our cases provided information to the public. We address the latter concern in Key 
Design Decision No. 19, Stigma Strategy. 
As shown in Figure 12, w ith few exceptions, the LOL Rs in our cases did not report data 
regarding individualized lending on either a contemporaneous or delayed basis.  We 
identified three levels of disclosure in our cases: ( i) only aggregate data disclosed (27 of 33 
cases), ( ii) borrowers identified but not amounts borrowed ( six of 33 cases), and (iii) 
borrowers identified with the amounts borrowed ( five of 33 cases). The overwhelming 
majority (27 of 33 cases) chose to report information on a delayed basis, whether in 
aggregate or more detail. This could be due to reporting occurring in  periodic (weekly, 
monthly, etc.) reports.  
Figure 12: Disclosure  
Disclosure Type of disclosure 
Short-form case name 
Blind auction 
results 
announced (a) 
Delayed 
disclosure 
Utilization 
reported in 
the 
aggregate (b) 
Borrowers 
identified (c) 
Amounts 
identified to 
borrower (d) 
Canada CT Repo  X  X   
Canada Term PRA-PS   X   
Canada TLF   X   
Canada Term PRA   X   
ECB FTOs   X   
ECB TROs X  X   
Greece ELA   X   
Hong Kong 1965    X  
Hong Kong 2008   X   
Hungary Liquidity  X  X X 
Norway Covered Bond X  X   
Russia OBR   X   
Russia LO (e)   X   
Thailand FIDF  X X   
UK BoE 1825   X   
UK BoE 1866   X   
UK DWF   X X   
UK ELTR X  X   
UK ECTR/CTRF X  X   
UK ILTR X  X   
151
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 69 ---
US Aldrich-Vreeland   X   
US FHLB 1932–1941  X X   
US FHLB GFC (f)   X   
US NYCH 1893  X  X X 
US NYCH 1914  X X   
US NYCH 1873  X    
US NYCH 1884  X X   
US NYCH 1890  X  X X 
US NYCH 1907  X X   
US RFC 1932–1933 (g)  X X X X 
US TAF (h) X X  X X 
US Y2K SLF (i) X  X   
US Y2K SFF X  X   
Totals 9 12 27 6 5 
(a) Details of auction results such as amounts bid, stop-out rate, and number of bidders are announced in close proximity 
to the completion of the operation, but borrowers are not identified. 
(b) Utilization of program is reported in aggregate, but borrowers are not identified.  
(c) Individual borrowers are identified, but the amounts borrowed are not disclosed.  
(d) In some instances, borrowers are named along with the amounts they borrowed.  
(e) This case covers several lending facilities, which had differing disclosure policies. The Lombard facility had the most 
public disclosure of the facilities, while post-default interventions lacked public disclosure and communication. 
(f) The agency reported aggregate lending data by region monthly. However, because of its need to raise additional 
funds, it filed securities offerings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which required more detailed 
disclosure regarding the agency’s lending, including identifying some borrowers by name and amount. 
(g) Under the original RFC Act, the RFC was to publish aggregated loans by borrower class. Mid-1932 legislation required 
the RFC to report names of borrowers and amount and rate of interest monthly. After disclosure, stigma likely offset 
the effectiveness of RFC lending. 
(h) The Fed publicized the auction parameters and disclosed auction results but did not disclose identifiable, loan-level 
data until after the TAF expired and it was required to do so in response to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
request (Runkel 2022f). 
(i) Borrowing at the SLF was published through the Fed’s weekly H.4.1 releases. 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Disclosure is often made through periodic reporting mandated by regulation . Most LOLRs 
include some discussion of usage in their reports. But such disclosure almost always is in an 
aggregate form that does not identify individual borrowers. In some cases , the discussion 
combines information from different programs. This type of disclosure may be designed to 
remove any fear of exposure and stigma for the participants. Of note, although the EU’s 
regulatory structure supports transparency and disclosure of harmonized information 
regarding banks’ encumbered and unencumbered assets, the European Banking Authority 
was careful “to ensure that the level and evolution of assets encumbered to central banks 
and the amount of liquidity assistance given by central banks cannot be detected” from such 
disclosures (EBA 2014, 3). 
The one area where disclosure does occur on a contemporaneous basis is for a program that 
employs an auction. The LOLR usually release s the results of auctions soon after the 
operation ends, providing information about volum e, number of bidders, number of 
successful bidders, prices, and overage. These results provide valuable information to the 
auction process but do not identify individual participants. For example, the UK ILTR, ELTR 
and ECTR programs announced results on the day the auction s occurred (Fulmer 2022h). 
Similarly, for the US Y2K SFF program, the FRBNY published the volume of bids, the range of 
152
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 70 ---
prices submitted, and the lowest accepted bid for each auction operation ; it did not publish 
the names of borrowers (Leonard 2022f). 
One interesting situation we observe among our cases is the disclosure of lending 
information by the FHLB System during the early stages of the GFC, when it experienced a 
dramatic uptick in lending. The agency was required to disc lose aggregate lending data by 
region on a monthly basis, which it did. However, because of its need to raise additional 
funds, it also had to file securities offerings with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC). These SEC reports required more deta iled disclosure regarding the agency’s lending 
and were a source for more current and detailed information about its developments, 
including the identification of certain borrowers (Leonard 2022b). 
Given the original reasons stated at the beginning of this section, most LOLRs do make some 
type of disclosure. When no disclosure is made, or when disclosure is very limited, there is a 
risk that the credibility of the LOLR will be impugned, especially wh en there are concerns 
about political influences. This dynamic can be observed in Thailand with respect to its 
“secret” funding of financial institutions and in Russia and Hungary, where the rules 
concerning how government lending was distributed and the r esults were perceived as 
opaque (Hoffner 2022d; Mott and Buchholtz 2022; Runkel 2022d). 
19. Stigma Strategy: How did the LOLR address stigma problems —through auctions, 
or through other methods? 
Stigma is a primary concern for program design.  Blind following of Bagehot’s dictum to use 
a “very high rate” can lead to stigmatized programs that are unable to serve their main 
purpose. This is an old problem: Owen and Robinson (2003) and Gorton and Metrick (2013) 
discuss how discount window stigma prevented the Federal Reserve from responding to the 
runs of the Great Depression.  
Discount window stigma has persisted through time and challenged the Fed during the early 
stages of the GFC. Fed  Chairman Ben Bernanke described the situation in August 2007: 
“Banks were reluctant to rely on discount window credit to address their funding needs. The 
banks’ concern was that their recourse to the discount window, if it became known, might 
lead market participants to infer weakness—the so-called stigma problem” (Armantier and 
Holt 2020, 5361).  
Program design should aim to minimize stigma. Techniques we observe in our cases include:  
• Providing for a large number of participants,  
• Using auctions to set pricing,  
• Allocating or limiting funds, and  
• Delaying settlement.  
153
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 71 ---
The Fed’s TAF utilized some of these features to provide discount window funding to banks 
without stigmatizing borrowers; overcoming stigma was the driving motivation of the 
program (FOMC 2007a). TAF mitigated stigma by increasing the number of borrowers and 
tweaking features of the discount window that facilitated adverse selection —chiefly, 
immediate availability of funding. Most importantly, TAF priced loans through auction, 
setting a minimum bid that was below the market rate for interbank loans (LIBOR) (Runkel 
2022f). This feature countered the view that participating banks were distressed, since 
“banks would not necessarily signal an abnormally high demand by bidding” (Armantier, 
Krieger, and McAndrews 2008, 6). Moreover, distressed banks couldn’t rely on the TAF since 
some bidders did not win funds. And because no bidder could borrow more than 10% of the 
allotment (because the Fed wanted to be sure the liquidity was not monopolized by a few big 
borrowers), the facility could hardly be viewed as a lifeline for banks in dire straits. 
Additionally, loans settled three days after the auction, inconsistent with the needs of a 
failing institution (Mishkin 2008).  
The TAF was immediately successful in terms of amounts borrowed, and Armantier and Holt 
(2020) argue that its destigmatizing effect is evidenced by the fact that absent discount 
window stigma, no borrower should have bid above the DW rate, yet more than half the TAF 
participants did just that . Banks were willing to pay a premium (in excess of 44 bps, on 
average) to borrow from the TAF instead of the DW (Armantier et al. 2015).  
Several cases also demonstrate the chilling effect of stigma after disclosure. Where identities 
of banks that borrowed are disclosed, there is almost always a pullback from those banks 
and from the facility. When a borrower is identified, the public repercussions can be 
negative, with counterparties pulling back and depositors running . This occurred in the 
Panic of 1890 when the NYCH published the names of CLC borrowers along with the amounts 
they borrowed and balance sheet information . Within a short time after th e disclosure, one 
of the banks identified failed (Hoffner 2022f).  
Another example is the newly created Reconstruction Finance Corporation during the Great 
Depression. The legislation that established the RFC required it to publish quarterly reports 
in the Federal Reserve bulletin providing aggregate information about loans to each class of 
borrower, including number of borrowers by state (Fed 1932). However, in 1932, concerns 
about corruption in lending prompted Congre ss to pass legislation requiring the RFC to 
report monthly on “its activities and expenditures . . . with a statement showing the names 
of the borrowers to whom loans and advances were made, and the amount and rate of 
interest involved in each case” (US Congress 1932a, 8). Even though the intent was to only 
circulate the reports to the Senate and not publish them to the public, the Clerk of the House 
of Representatives interpreted the law to require the public reading of borrowers, which he 
did on the floor of the House. This action created a clean , natural experiment, as the timing 
of loans resulted in  some borrowers  remaining secret while others were revealed. Anbil  
(2017) analyzes the outcome of this experiment, finding that “revealed banks” lost deposits 
faster and were more likely to be closed than “non-revealed” banks, and concluding that “. . . 
these results imply that keeping LOLR loans secret will lead to higher deposit funding at 
banks that borrow from their LOLR” (Anbil 2017, 5). 
154
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 72 ---
This theory seems to have been proven as recently as the GFC. Governor Mervyn King of the 
Bank of England observed: “[Banks] deliberately did not ask for the liquidity they needed for 
fear of damaging their reputation—the “stigma problem” (Armantier and Holt 2020, 5631). 
Some banks did borrow from the discount window, but information regarding a number of 
these participants (such as Barclays) were leaked, and in the case of Northern Rock, led to a 
depositor run and its eventual takeover by the government (Armantier et al. 2015; House of 
Commons 2009) . The issue is discussed at length in the House of Commons’ report on 
Northern Rock, but the report does not identify any specific actions taken by the BoE to 
mitigate stigma; the report does urge the BoE to “place particular emphasis” on the issue in 
its further reforms (House of Commons 2008, 50). 
If the crisis of an individual bank or the system is severe enough, banks will borrow even at 
the risk of disclosure and stigma. This is what occurred in Greece in 2009. The situation for 
the Greek financial institutions was severe because of the double impact of the default on 
Greek sovereign bonds (that comprised an outsized amount of available collateral) and 
underlying concerns about bank solvency. As a result, most banks could not borrow from 
ECB liquidity facilities , so b orrowing from the ELA , orchestrated by the B oG, was the only 
available funding. ELA p articipation was broad, and stigma was not reported as a concern  
because banks needed ELA regardless of the reputational risks  (Runkel 2022c). According 
to Spiros Pantelias, then head of financial stability at B oG, “[ELA] may have been viewed 
negatively by market participants but banks had no other alternative at that time” (Pantelias 
2021a).  
In the Thailand case , borrowers apparently were successfully insulated from stigma by 
secrecy. The liquidity support the FIDF provided to finance institutions  appeared on the 
BOT’s balance sheet only in aggregate and was revealed only after 58 of the institutions were 
suspended from operations but before their failure  (Runkel 2022d). So secret was the FIDF 
lending that the legislature publicly criticize d the BOT about the lack of transparency  
(Prateepchaikul 1997). However, the decision not to disclose liquidity support prevented 
market observers from stigmatizing the borrowers. 
20. Exit Strategy: How did the LOLR plan for the termination of the program? 
LOLRs have several options when deciding on exit strategies: 
• Use a pricing mechanism,  
• Set an expiration date,  
• Wind down by reducing the allotted amount and/or frequency of auctions, and 
• Transition to a standing facility.  
Some programs use more than one of these mechanisms. For example , a program may be 
announced with an end date to emphasize that it is intended as a temporary measure, but it 
may also have a pricing mechanism that becomes unattractive once the market stresses are 
relieved. In general, the first three options provide wide flexibility to resolve the program in 
155
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 73 ---
the most appropriate manner. The fourth represents a decision that regardless of whether 
the program is still being used, having it at the ready for future deployment  is valuable. We 
further consider these choices below. 
Using a Pricing Mechanism 
One benefit of using pricing as an exit strategy is that it naturally depresses usage of the BBEL 
program as market prices recover , which then makes the shuttering of a program much 
simpler. Announcing the closure of a program that is no longer extending liquidity is easier 
than doing so for one that is still providing liquidity to institutions. Bagehot’s basic theory to 
lend at a premium rate is consistent with this strategy. If the BBEL program is priced at a 
premium, then, when the market recovers, the price will be unattractive, and borrowers will 
naturally migrate back to the market funding. This is the theory supporting the NYCH 
premium pricing of its CLCs (Gorton and Tallman 2016) . According to Gorton and Tallman 
(2016), the interest rate charged essentially matched the rates on commercial paper; 
however, the haircut applied to CLC collateral made CLCs more costly. As a result, CLCs were 
an attractive substitute for cash  in a crisis, but n ormalizing m arket conditions quickly 
incentivized borrowing banks to retire their CLC holdings (Gorton and Tallman 2016) . See 
Figure 13 for a visualization of CLCs serving as an attractive option during the crisis but 
quickly becoming costly compared to market rates. 
  
156
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 74 ---
Figure 13: Market Rates in New York City and CLC Interest, 1914 
 
Note: The dotted line at 6% represents the interest rate charged by NYCH for utilizing CLCs. The gray shading 
in August –October represents the acute phase of the crisis , during which the New York Clearing House 
Association issued CLCs. 
Source: Fulmer 2022j. 
Two of the Bank of Canada’s BBEL facilities during the GFC used pricing as a natural exit 
strategy. The Term Loan Facility and the Term PRA facility for private-sector instruments 
both contained a minimum bid rate that disincentivized usage during normalized conditions, 
as banks could more easily find liquidity on the market rather than from the central bank  
(Longworth 2010; Zorn, Wilkins, and Engert 2009). The Norway Covered Bond program also 
utilized a pricing mechanism as an exit strategy , implementing a premium to participate in 
the program before closing the facility. Initially the program set a minimum price of  
Norwegian Interbank Offered Rate ( Nibor) minus 20 bps. As market conditions improved, 
Norges Bank gradually increased the minimum price , and the last auction where bids were 
submitted was in October 2009. The bank then set the minimum price at N ibor plus 70 bps. 
The last two auctions in November and December were canceled owing to a lack of 
participation, and the facility phased out in December (Norges Bank 2010). 
Setting an Expiration Date 
Another exit strategy is for the LOLR to set an expiration date for the program.  Many BBEL 
programs are announced with an expiration date to emphasize that they are temporary. The 
157
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 75 ---
Fed, for example, announced that its Y2K SLF loans would expire on April 7, 2000, six months 
after it announced the program (Leonard 2022e). Expiration dates can always be extended 
if the LOLR chooses ; and in a prolonged crisis, such as the GFC, these dates often are 
repeatedly extended.  
Winding Down by Reducing the Allotted Amount and/or Frequency of Auctions  
Pricing alone does not always work as an exit strategy , and a firm expiration date may not 
be the best choice. For example, the US TAF, announced on December 12, 2007, committed 
to four auctions to be held in December and January. The program was called “temporary ,” 
and no firm expiration date was published. However, the Fed also stated that it “may conduct 
additional auctions in subsequent months, depending in part on evolving market conditions” 
(Fed 2007, 1). The TAF eventually conducted 70 auctions and had a maximum outstanding 
amount of almost USD 500 billion. Fed staff expected the TAF to “d ownsize pretty 
automatically” as participants stopped seeking funds in favor of cheaper alternatives (FOMC 
2008c, 218). But usage remained robust until the Fed moved to wind down the program by 
reducing individual auction sizes and maturities (Runkel 2022f). 
In its September 2009 meeting, Fed staff first proposed a gradual reduction in offering 
amounts. The Fed decided then to phase out 84 -day auctions by shortening the 
maturities first to 70 days, and then removing credit longer than 28 days altogether. On 
January 27, 2010, the FOMC announced the wind -down of several GFC programs 
including the TAF, specifying the final two amounts offered (USD 50 billion and USD 25 
billion) and dates (February 8 and March 8) when they also raised the minimum bid rate. 
(Runkel 2022f). 
Other than pricing mechanisms or adopting temporary programs into standing facilities, 
some BBEL programs did not publicly state a specific exit strategy beyond a simple phaseout 
of the program. For example, the Bank of Canada did not utilize a pricing mechanism to wind 
down the Term PRA facility, as the pricing for that facility fulfilled a monetary policy purpose. 
Instead, the Bank of Canada gradually announced that it would not renew funding from the 
facility, and decreased the size and frequency of auctions, before finally shuttering the facility 
(Sankar 2022c). Likewise, the ECB did not provide specific details on the exit strategy for the 
TROs and the FTOs beyond that they would eventually end (Runkel 2022a; Runkel 2022b). 
Such phaseouts are gradual, to allow counterparties time to find alternative funding sources.  
The Russian banking system improved relatively quickly after August  1998, and ruble 
deposits of commercial banks at the CBR saw marked increases beginning in September 
(Owen and Robinson 2003) . Given these developments, the Central Bank of Russia also 
scaled down liquidity operations for the Lombard and overnight facilities and ended lending 
by November (Owen and Robinson 2003).  
Transitioning to a Standing Facility 
In certain cases, central banks adopt temporary BBEL facilities into their standing liquidity 
frameworks, as was the case with the Bank of England’s Discount Window Facility and ELTR 
operations (made permanent with the ILTR facility) (Fulmer 2022e; Fulmer 2022g). 
158
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 76 ---
Hong Kong also adopted two of its five temporary emergency actions as standing facilities, 
the discretionary lending and swap facilities ; these two received the most usage, whereas 
the enhanced discount win dow (longer terms, broader collateral opti ons) was not used  
(Hoffner 2022b) . Since these liquidity facilities are available during noncrisis periods, 
central banks must ensure that the pricing mechanism makes utilizing these facilities costly 
compared to funding in the market during normal times. Therefore, using pricing as a natural 
exit strategy can be very useful.  
Conclusions 
In our review of these cases, we identify several major themes:  
(1) Early deployment of credible BBEL assistance in the acute phase of a crisis can serve 
to arrest or moderate the crisis and stop it from evolving into an extended chronic 
phase; 
(2) Relying on existing authorities, programs, or administrative frameworks enables  
the efficient design and deployment of BBEL programs; 
(3) If the liquidity constraint persists, we often see the use of multiple BBEL programs 
to provide wide access to a broad range of participants; 
(4) We see other types of supports also being employed alongside BBEL programs, such 
as credit and account guarantees in the acute phase  and asset purchases, 
recapitalizations, and loan guarantees in the chronic phase; and  
(5) In all phases, clear communication is a valuable policy tool to drive utilization , and 
positive announcement effects are possible.  
Based on the cases discussed in this paper and the related academic evidence, we propose a 
(less pithy) restatement of Bagehot’s dictum:  
In the acute (panic) phase of a crisis, a LOLR should lend freely and broadly against 
good collateral, at rates set by auction, taking care to avoid disclosing details 
about individual borrowers. 
Unpacking the reasoning behind this modernized dictum, we have: 
• “lend freely and broadly”—we add an explicit mention of “broadly,” consistent with 
practice both in Bagehot’s time and today. 
• “against good or sound collateral”—no change here. But it is important to note that 
“good” or “sound” collateral for Bagehot referred to the status of that collateral 
before the panic began. 
159
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 77 ---
• “at rates set by auction”—the auction mechanism was the most important innovation 
of the GFC-era programs. A well-designed auction mechanism will yield penalty rates 
with a minimum amount of stigma. 
• “taking care to avoid disclosing details about individual borrowers” —efforts to 
minimize stigma must also include only minimal disclosure about individual 
borrowers during the acute phase of the crisis , or we have just wasted a nicely 
designed auction. However, providing such information once markets have calmed 
can provide an essential service to taxpayers and potentially help mitigate moral -
hazard concerns. 
Note that the restated dictum does not say anything about “solvent” institutions. Yes, we did 
that on purpose. 
  
160
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 78 ---
References 
Alvarez, Scott G., Thomas C. Baxter, and Robert F. Hoyt. 2020. “The Legal Authorities Framing 
the Government’s Response to the Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial Crises 2, no.1. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1035&context=journal-of-
financial-crises 
Amending the Bank of Thailand Act, B.E. 2485 (No. 2) . 1997. Emergency Decree B.E. 2540 . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/amending-bank-thailand-act-be-2485-no-2 
Anbil, Sriya. 2017. “Managing Stigma during a Financial Crisis.” Finance and Economics 
Discussion Series 2017-007. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/managing-stigma-during-financial-crisis 
Anbil, Sriya, and Angela Vossmeyer. 2017. “Liquidity from Two Lending Facilities.” Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series 2017, no. 117.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/18172 
Anderson, Haelim, Kinda Cheryl Hachem, and Simpson Zhang. 2021. “Reallocating Liquidity 
to Resolve a Crisis: Evidence from the Panic of 1873.” NBER Working Paper No. 28870, May 
2021.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/reallocating-liquidity-resolve-crisis-
evidence-panic-1873 
Andruszkiewicz, Oskar, Juliette Mathis, Charu Wilkinson, Michalis Vassiliadis, Peppas 
Konstantinos, and George Gatopoulos. 2020. “Study on the Financial Sector in Greece during 
the Economic Adjustment Programmes: 2010 -2018.” Europe an Commission Final Report. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20137 
Armantier, Olivier, Eric Ghysels, Asani Sarkar, and Jeffrey Shrader. 2015. “Discount Window 
Stigma during the 2007 –2008 Financial Crisis.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff 
Report No. 483.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2379 
Armantier, Olivier, and Charles A Holt. 2020. “Overcoming Discount Window Stigma: An 
Experimental Investigation.” Review of Financial Studies 33, no. 12: 5630–59.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/overcoming-discount-window-stigma-experimental-
investigation 
Armantier, Olivier, Sandra Krieger, and James McAndrews. 2008. “The Federal Reserve’s 
Term Auction Facility.” Current Issues in Economics and Finance 14, no. 5: 1–11.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2380 
Ashcraft, Adam B., Morten L. Bech, and Scott Frame. 2008. “The Federal Home Loan Bank 
System: The Lender of Next-to-Last Resort?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 
No. 357. November 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/10257 
161
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 79 ---
Bagehot, Walter. 1873. Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market . 4th ed. London: 
Henry S. King & Co.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lombard-street-description-money-market-fourth-
edition 
Baker, Colleen. 2012. “The Federal Reserve as Last Resort.” University of Michigan Journal of 
Law Reform 46, no. 1, Notre Dame Legal Studies Paper No. 13-02.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-reserve-last-resort 
Bank of Canada (BoC). 2007. “Bank of Canada Temporarily Expands List of Securities Eligible 
for Term PRA Transactions.” Notice, December 12, 2007.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/bank-canada-temporarily-expands-list-
securities-eligible-term-pra-transactions 
———. 2008a. “Terms and Conditions for Term Loan Facility (TLF).”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/terms-and-conditions-term-loan-facility-tlf 
———. 2008b. “Bank of Canada Policy for Buying and Selling Securities under Subsection 
18.1 (1) of the Bank of Canada Act.” July 15, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-canada-policy-buying-and-selling-securities-
under-subsection-181-1-bank-canada-act 
———. 2008c. “Bank of Canada Introduces Further Measure to Provide Liquidity to the 
Canadian Financial System.” Notice, November 12, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-canada-introduces-further-measure-provide-
liquidity-canadian-financial-system 
———. 2009. “Terms and Conditions for the Term Purchase and Resale Agreement (PRA) 
Facility for Private-Sector Instruments.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/terms-and-conditions-term-purchase-and-resale-
agreement-pra-facility-private-sector 
———. 2013. “Bank of Canada Liquidity Facilities.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/bank-canada-liquidity-facilities 
———. 2020a. “Monetary Policy Report–April 2020.” Quarterly Report, April 2020.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/18289 
———. 2020b. “Bank of Canada to Introduce a Corporate Bond Purchase Program.” Notice, 
April 15, 2020.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-canada-introduce-corporate-bond-purchase-
program 
———. 2020c. “Bank of Canada to Introduce  a Provincial Bond Purchase Program.” Notice, 
April 15, 2020.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/18543 
162
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 80 ---
Bank of England  (BoE). 2007. “Central Bank Measures to Address Elevated Pressures in 
Short-Term Funding Markets.” Press release, December 12, 2007.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/central-bank-measures-address-elevated-pressures-
short-term-funding-markets-0 
———. 2009. “Market Notice: Discount Window Facility: Summary of Changes.” Market 
notice, February 2, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/market-notice-discount-window-facility-summary-
changes-02032009 
———. 2011. “Introduction of the Extended Collater al Term Repo Facility.” Press release, 
December 6, 2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/introduction-extended-collateral-term-repo-facility 
———. 2012. “Sterling Monetary Framework: Extended Collateral Term Repo Facility.” 
Market notice, June 15, 2012.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sterling-monetary-framework-extended-collateral-
term-repo-facility-0 
———. 2013. “Liquidity Insurance at the Bank of England: Developments in the Sterling 
Monetary Framework.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/liquidity-insurance-bank-england-developments-
sterling-monetary-framework 
———. 2014. “Indexed Long -Term Repo Operations and Contingent Term Repo Facility .” 
Market notice, January 16, 2014.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/17569 
———. 2020. “Activation of the Contingent Term Repo Facility.” Market notice, March 24, 
2020.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/activation-contingent-term-repo-facility-market-notice-
24-march-2020 
———. n.d. “Contingent Term Repo Facility Results.” Dataset.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/contingent-term-repo-facility-results 
Bank of Japan. 2007. “On the Measures Announced by Five Central Banks on December 12, 
2007.” Press release, December 12, 2007.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2391 
Bank of Thailand  (BOT). 2002. “Fiscalization of Financial Institutions Development Fund’s 
Losses.” BOT News No. 22/2022.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/fiscalization-financial-institutions-development-funds-
losses 
———. 2009. “Assets and Liabilities of Finance Companies.” Dataset.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/assets-and-liabilities-finance-companies 
163
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 81 ---
———. n.d. “Financial Institutions Development Fund.” Accessed January 22, 2021.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20172 
Bernanke, Ben S., Timothy F. Geithner, Henry M. Paulson, and J. Nellie Liang, eds. 2020. First 
Responders: Inside the U.S. Strategy for Fighting the 2007 –2009 Global Financial Crisis . New 
Haven: Yale University Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/first-responders-inside-us-strategy-fighting-
2007-2009-global-financial-crisis 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System  (Fed). 1932. “First Quarterly Report of 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20578 
———. 2007. “Federal Reserve and Other Central Banks Announce Measures Designed to 
Address Elevated Pressures in Short -Term Funding Markets.” Press release, December 12, 
2007.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-reserve-and-other-central-banks-announce-
measures-designed-address-elevated 
———. 2007–2010. Term Auction Facility transaction data.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/14984 
———. 2008a. “Federal Reserve Announces Steps to Enhance the Effectiveness of Its 
Existing Liquidity Facilities.” Press release, July 30, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3197 
———. 2008b. “Terms and Conditions for Term Auction Facility.” Press release, July 30, 
2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3321 
———. 2008c. “Federal Reserve and Other Central Banks Announce Further Coordinated 
Actions to Expand Significantly the Capacity to Provide U.S. Dollar Liquidity.” Press release, 
September 29, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20177 
———. 2008d. “FOMC Statement.” Press release, December 16, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/11300 
———. 2009. “Federal Reserve Will Offer $150 Billion in 28 -Day Credit through Its Term 
Auction Facility Today.” Press release, January 12, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20178 
———. 2020. “Federal Reserve Announces E xtensive New Measures to Support the 
Economy.” Press release, March 23, 2020.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-reserve-announces-extensive-new-measures-
support-economy 
164
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 82 ---
Bordo, Michael. 1998. “Commentary on ‘The Financial Crisis of 1825 and the Re structuring 
of the British Financial System.’” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review May/June 1998.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/commentary-financial-crisis-1825-and-
restructuring-british-financial-system 
Cannon, James Graham. 1910. “Clea ring House Methods and Practices.” Publications of the 
National Monetary Commission, 61st Congress, 2nd Session, Senate Doc. No. 491.  
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/clearing-house-methods-and-practices 
Carlson, Mark A., Burcu Duygan-Bump, and William R. Nelson. 2015. “Why Do We Need Both 
Liquidity Regulations and a Lender of Last Resort? A Perspective from Federal Reserve 
Lending during the 2007 -09 US Financial Crisis.” Finance and Economics Discussi on Series 
2015-011. Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3322 
Castiglionesi, Fabio, and Wolf Wagner. 2012. “Turning Bagehot on His Head: Lending at 
Penalty Rates When Banks Can Become Insolvent.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44, 
no. 1.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/turning-bagehot-his-head-lending-penalty-rates-when-
banks-can-become-insolvent 
Central Bank of the Russian Federation (CBR). 1999. Annual Report 1998.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-1998-0 
———. 2000. Annual Report 1999.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-1999-0 
Champ, Bruce, and Sa rah Wakefield. 2007. “Reserve Market Rates and Discount Window 
Lending.” Economic Trends, October. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/reserve-market-rates-and-discount-window-lending 
Cheun, Samuel, Isabel von Köppen -Mertes, and Benedict Weller. 2009. “The Collateral 
Frameworks of the Eurosystem, the Federal Reserve System and the Bank of England and 
the Financial Market Turmoil.” ECB Occasional Paper, No. 107. European Central Bank.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4068 
Cross, Michael, Paul Fisher, and Olaf Weeken. 2010. “The Bank’s Balance Sheet during the 
Crisis.” Quarterly Bulletin 2010 Q1. Bank of England.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banks-balance-sheet-during-crisis 
Dobler, M arc, Diarmuid Murphy, and Bozena Radzewicz -Bak. 2016. “The Lender of Last 
Resort Function after the Global Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper No. 16/10.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lender-last-resort-function-after-global-financial-crisis 
Domanski, Dietrich, Richhild Moessner, and William R. Nelson. 2014. “Central Banks as 
Lender of Last Resort: Experiences during the 2007–2010 Crisis and Lessons for the Future.” 
165
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 83 ---
Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Washington DC: Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/14889 
Domanski, Dietrich, and Vladyslav Sushko. 2014. “Rethinking the Lender of Last Resort: 
Workshop Summary.” BIS Paper No. 79, September 2014.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/rethinking-lender-last-resort-workshop-summary 
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Jacob A. Frenkel. 1984. “The Gold Standard and the Bank of England 
in the Crisis of 1847.” In A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821–1931, edited by 
Michael D. Bordo and Anna J. Schwartz, 233–76. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gold-standard-and-bank-england-crisis-1847 
Drossos, Evangeline Sophia, and Spence Hilton. 2000. “The Federal Reserve’s Contingency 
Financing Plan for the Century Date Change.” Current Issues in Economics and Finance 6, no. 
15: 6.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/19968 
European Banking Authority. 2014. “Guidelines on the Disclosure of Encumbered and 
Unencumbered Assets.” No. EBA-GL-2014-03, June 27, 2014.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20139 
European Central Bank  (ECB). 2008a. “Measures to Further Expand the Collateral 
Framework and Enhance the Provision of Liquidity.” Press release, October 15, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2565 
———. 2008b. Regulation (EC) No. 1053/2008 of the European Central Bank of 23 October 
2008 on Temporary Changes to the Rules Relating to Eligibility of Collateral. Official Journal 
of the European Union, Vol. 282.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20030 
———. 2010. “The ECB’s Response to the Financial Cri sis.” ECB Monthly Bulletin, October 
2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ecbs-response-financial-crisis-0 
———. 2013. “ELA Procedures.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2012. 
———. 2019. A Tale of Two Decades: The ECB’s Monetary Policy at 20 . ECB Working Paper 
Series No. 2346, December 2019.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20071 
———. 2021. “History of All ECB Open Market Operations.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20021 
European Commission (EC). 2008. “The Application of State Aid Rules to Measures Taken in 
Relation to Financial Institutions in the Context of the Current Global Financial Crisis.” 
166
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 84 ---
Official Journal of the European Union, 2008/C 270/02.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/14246 
———. 2010. “State Aid NN 68/2009 Hungary Liquidity Scheme for Banks.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/state-aid-nn-682009-hungary-liquidity-
scheme-banks 
Far Eastern Economic Review (FEER). 1966. Far Eastern Economic Review (April–June 1966). 
Vol. 52. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/far-eastern-economic-review-vol-51-52 
Federal Open Market Committee  (FOMC). 1999. “Transcript of the Meeting of the Federal 
Open Market Committee, August 24, 1999.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/19966 
———. 2007a. “Transcript of the Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 
18, 2007.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2994 
———. 2007b. “Transcript of the Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee, 
December 6, 2007.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20239 
———. 2008a. “Transcript of the Conference Call o f the Federal Open Market Committee, 
July 24, 2008.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2684 
———. 2008b. “Transcript of the Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee, 
October 7, 2008.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20237 
———. 2008c. “Transcript of the Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 
15–16, 2008.” https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3462 
Federal Reserve Act. 2017. Federal Reserve Act, Section 13. Power of Federal Reserve Banks. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/14426 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 1999. “SFF Term Sheet.” October 7, 1999.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/19974 
Fisher, Paul. 2009. “The Bank of England’s Balance Sheet: Monetary Policy and Liquidity 
Provision during the Financial Crisis.” Speech delivered at the Professio nal Pensions Show, 
London.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-englands-balance-sheet-monetary-policy-and-
liquidity-provision-during-financial-crisis 
Fisher, Paul, Tarkus Frost, and Olaf Weeken. 2011. “Pricing Central Bank Liquidity through 
Product-Mix Auctions – the First Anniversary of the Bank of England’s Indexed Long -Term 
Repo Operations.” October 4, 2011. Bank of England.  
167
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 85 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/pricing-central-bank-liquidity-through-product-mix-
auctions-first-anniversary-bank-englands 
Fulmer, Sean. 2022a. “New York Clearing House Association: Overview.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/32 
———. 2022b. “Norway: Covered Bond Swap Program.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/43 
———. 2022c. “United Kingdom: Bank of England Lending during the Panic of 1825.” Journal 
of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/47 
———. 2022d. “United Kingdom: Bank of England Lending during the Panic of 1866.” Journal 
of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/48 
———. 2022e. “United Kingdom: Discount Window Facility.” Journal of Financial Crises , 
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity, 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/49 
———. 2022f. “United Kingdom: Ex tended Collateral Term Repo Facility.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/51 
———. 2022g. “United Kingdom: Extended-Collateral Long-Term Repo.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 2. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/50 
———. 2022h. “United Kingdom: Indexed Long-Term Repo.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 
2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/52 
———. 2022i. “United States: Aldrich -Vreeland Emergency Currency during the Crisis of 
1914.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/53 
———. 2022j. “United States: New York Clearing House , the Crisis of 1914.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/57 
———. 2022k. “United States: New York Clearing House, the Panic of 1873.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/58 
168
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 86 ---
González-Páramo, José Manuel. 2011. “The ECB’s Monetary Policy during the Crisis.” Closing 
speech presented at the Tenth Economic Policy Conference, Málaga, October 21, 2011. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ecbs-monetary-policy-during-crisis 
Goodstadt, Leo F. 2005. “Crisis and Challenge: The Changing Role of the Hongkong & 
Shanghai Bank, 1950-2000.” Working Paper No. 7/2005. Hong Kong Institute for Monetary 
Research.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/crisis-and-challenge-changing-role-hongkong-shanghai-
bank-1950-2000 
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick. 2013. “The Federal Reserve and Panic Prevention: The 
Roles of Financial Regulation and Lender of Last Resort.” Journal of Economic Pe rspectives 
27, no. 4: 45–64.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-reserve-and-panic-prevention-roles-financial-
regulation-and-lender-last-resort 
Gorton, Gary, and Ellis W. Tallman. 2016. “How Did Pre -Fed Banking Panics End?” NBER 
Working Paper No. 22036, February 2016.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/how-did-pre-fed-banking-panics-end 
———. 2018. Fighting Financial Crises: Learning from  the Past . Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/fighting-financial-crises-learning-past 
Government Accountability Office. 2011. “Federal Reserve System: Opportunities Exist to 
Strengthen Policies and Processes for Managing Emergency Assistance.” Report to 
Congressional Addressees, No. GAO-11-696. Washington, DC.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20243 
Government of Hong Kong. 1966. “Annual Report in Hong Kong for the Year 1965.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-hong-kong-year-1965 
Haksar, Vikram, and Lorenzo Giorgianni. 2000. “Financial Sector Restructuring.” In Thailand: 
Selected Issues, 27–44. IMF Staff Country Report No. 00/21, February 2000. Washington, DC: 
International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-selected-issues 
Hauser, Andrew. 2014. “Lender of Last Resort Operations during the Financial Crisis: Seven 
Practical Lessons from the United Kingdom.” BIS Paper No. 79.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lender-last-resort-operations-during-financial-crisis-
seven-practical-lessons-united 
Her Majesty’s Treasury, Bank of England, and Financial Services Authority (HMT/BoE/FSA). 
2006. “Memorandum of Understanding between HM Treasury, the Bank of England and the 
Financial Services Authority.” March 22, 2006.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/memorandum-understanding-between-hm-treasury-
bank-england-and-financial-services-authority 
169
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 87 ---
Hoffner, Benjamin. 2022a. “Hong Kong: Private Emergency Loans, 1965.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/40 
———. 2022b. “Hong Kong: Temporary Liquidity Measures, 2008.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/41 
———. 2022c. “Russia: Central Bank Bonds, 1998.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/44 
———. 2022d. “Russia: Lombard and Overnight Loans, 1998.” Journal of Financial Cri ses 4, 
no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/45 
———. 2022e. “United States: New York Clearing House, the Panic of 1884.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/59 
———. 2022f. “United States: New York Clearing House, the Panic of 1890.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/60 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority  (HKMA). 1999. “Policy Statement on the Role of the Hong 
Kong Monetary Authority as Lender of Last Resort.” Quarterly Bulletin 8/1999.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/policy-statement-role-hong-kong-monetary-authority-
lender-last-resort 
———. 2008a. “HKMA to Provid e Liquidity Assistance to Licensed Banks in Hong Kong.” 
Press release, September 30, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/hkma-provide-liquidity-assistance-licensed-banks-
hong-kong 
———. 2008b. “Provision of Liquidity Assistance to Licensed Banks in Hong Kong: Annex 1.” 
Press release, September 30, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/provision-liquidity-assistance-licensed-banks-hong-
kong-annex-1 
House of Commons. 2008. “The Run  on the Rock.” Fifth Report of Session 2007 –2008, 
Treasury Committee.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/run-rock 
———. 2009. “The Nationalisation  of Northern Rock.” Thirty-first Report of Session 2008 –
2009, Public Accounts Committee.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/nationalization-northern-rock 
170
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 88 ---
International Monetary Fund  (IMF). 2011. “Hungary: Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional 
Access under the 2008 Stand-By Arrangement.” IMF Country Report No. 11/145, June 2011. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/hungary-ex-post-evaluation-exceptional-access-under-
2008-stand-arrangement 
———. 2021. “Questions and Answers on Special Drawing Rights.” IMF. August 23, 2021.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/questions-and-answers-special-drawing-rights 
Jacobson, Margaret, and Ellis W. Tallman. 2015. “Liquidity Provision during the Crisis of 
1914: Private and Public Sources.” Journal of Financial Stability 17: 22–34.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/liquidity-provision-during-crisis-1914-private-and-
public-sources 
James, Harold. 2013. “International Cooperation and Central Banks.” VoxEU, October 8, 2013.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/international-cooperation-and-central-banks 
Jao, Y.C. 1974. Banking and Currency in Hong Kong: A Study of Postwar Financial 
Development. London: Palgrave Macmillan.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banking-and-currency-hong-kong-study-postwar-
financial-development 
Kahn, Robert B., and Ellen E. Meade. 2016. “International Aspects of Central Banking: 
Diplomacy and Coordination.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-062. Divisions 
of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs Federal Reserve Board.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/international-aspects-central-banking-diplomacy-and-
coordination 
Kronick, Jeremy. 2016. “Looking for Liquidity–Banking and Emergency Liquidity Facilities.” 
Commentary No. 445, February 2016. C.D. Howe Institute.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/looking-liquidity-banking-and-emergency-liquidity-
facilities 
Lee, Nicholas Anthony. 2016. “Fluid Dynamics: Emergency Liquidity Assistance during the 
Eurocrisis.” Thesis, European University Institute Department of Law.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/fluid-dynamics-emergency-liquidity-assistance-during-
eurocrisis 
Legislative Council. 1997. Cap. 66 Exchange Fund Ordinance.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/cap-66-exchange-fund-ordinance-0 
Legislative Services Branch. 1985. Bank of Canada Act.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/18541 
Leonard, Natalie. 2022a. “United States: Federal Home Loan Bank Advances, 1932 –1941.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/54 
171
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 89 ---
———. 2022b. “United States: F ederal Home Loan Bank Advances, 2007 –2009.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/55 
———. 2022c. “United States: New York Clearing House, the Crisis of 1893.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/56 
———. 2022d. “United States: Reconstruction Finance Corporation, E mergency Lending to 
Financial Institutions, 1932–1933.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/62 
———. 2022e. “United States: Y2K Special Liquidity Facility.” Journal of Financial Cr ises 4, 
no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/64 
———. 2022f. “United States: Y2K Standby Financing Facility.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, 
no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/65 
Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Tomás Baliño, Charles Enoch, Anne -Marie Gulde, Marc Quintyn, and 
Leslie Teo. 2000. “Financial Sector Crisis and Restructuring: Lessons from Asia.” Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-sector-crisis-and-restructuring-lessons-asia 
Longworth, David. 2009. “Financial System Policy Responses to the Crisis.” Speech to the 
Financial Markets Association, March 12, 2009. Bank of Canada.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-system-policy-responses-crisis 
———. 2010. “Bank of Canada Liquidity Facilities –Past, Present, and Future.” BIS Review 
17/2010, Speech at the C.D. Howe Institute, February 17, 2010.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-canada-liquidity-facilities-past-present-and-future 
Mason, Joseph R. 2001a. “Do Lender of Last Resort Policies Matter? The Effects of 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Banks During the Great Depression.”  
Journal of Financial Services Research 20 No. 1, 2001.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/18186/ 
———. 2001b. “Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Financial Intermediaries 
and Commercial & Industrial Enterprise in the US, 1932-1937.” World Bank Group.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/18187 
McNamara, Christian, A dam Kulam, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2022. “Account 
Guarantee Survey.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/2 
172
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 90 ---
Mishkin, Frederic S. 2008. “The Federal Reserve’s Tools for R esponding to Financial 
Disruptions.” Speech presented at the Tuck Global Markets Conference, Tuck School of 
Business, Hanover, NH, February 15, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20242 
Mott, Carey, and Alec Buchholtz. 2022. “Hungary: Liquidity Scheme, 2009–2013.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/42 
Mourmouras, John. 2017. “On Emergency Liquidity Assistance: Theory and Evidence.” 
Speech presented at the Political Economy of Financial Markets (PEFM) Programme, Oxford 
University, Oxford, February 27, 2017.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20116 
Nabi, Ijaz, and Jayasankar Shivakumar. 2001. “Back from the Brink: Thailand’s Response to 
the 1997 Economic Crisis.” Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/back-brink-thailands-response-1997-economic-crisis 
Narajabad, Borghan, and Stefan Gissler. 2017a. “The Increased Role of the Federal Home 
Loan Bank System in Funding Markets, Part  1: Background.” FEDS Notes, October 18, 2017. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20110 
———. 2017b. “The Increased Role of the Federal Home Loan Bank System in Funding 
Markets, Part 2: Recent Trends and Potential Drivers.” FEDS Notes, October 18, 2017.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20109 
Norges Bank. 2008. “Circular No. 7/14: The Scheme of Exchanging Government Securities 
for Covered Bonds.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/scheme-exchanging-government-securities-covered-
bonds 
———. 2009a. “Circular No. 1/7: The Arrangement for the Exchange of Government 
Securities for Covered Bonds.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/arrangement-exchange-government-securities-covered-
bonds 
———. 2009b. “Circular No. 8/26: The Scheme of Exchanging Government Securiti es for 
Covered Bonds.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/circular-no-826-scheme-exchanging-government-
securities-covered-bonds 
———. 2010. “Annual Report 2009.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-report-2009-0 
Nunn, Sharon. 2022. “Canada: Continge nt Term Repo Facility.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, 
no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/33 
173
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 91 ---
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency  (OCC). 1873. “Eleventh Annual Report of the 
Comptroller of the Currency for the Year 1873.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1873 
———. 1907. “Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1907 
———. 1908. “Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1908 
———. 1914. “Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-comptroller-currency-1914. 
Owen, David Edwin Wynn, and David O. Robinson. 2003. Russia Rebounds. Washington, DC: 
International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/russia-rebounds 
Pantelias, Spiros. 2021a. Interview by Corey N. Runkel. Zoom, July 1, 2021.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20305 
———. Letter to Corey N. Runkel. 2021b. “RE: How Were ELA Recipients Selected?” June 29, 
2021.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20303 
Philler et al. v. Patterson. 1895. Pennsylvania State Reports, Vol. 168. New York and Albany: 
Banks & Brothers, Law Publishers.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/pennsylvania-state-reports-vol-168 
Praet, Peter. 2016. “The ECB and Its Role as Lender of Last Resort during the Crisis.” Speech 
presented at the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation conference on The Lender of Last 
Resort–An International Perspective. Washington, DC, February 10, 2016.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ecb-and-its-role-lender-last-resort-during-crisis 
Prateepchaikul, Verra. 1997. “And She Thought Soros Was No. 1.” Bangkok Post, August 12, 
1997, sec. Commentary.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20165 
Rao, Sujata. 1998. “Central Bank Tries New Loan Scheme.” Moscow Times, October 9, 1998.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/central-bank-tries-new-loan-scheme 
Rhee, June, Lily S. Engbith, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2022. “Market Support 
Programs: COVID-19 Crisis.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/4 
Rhee, June, Greg Feldberg, Ariel Smith, and Andrew Metrick. 2020. “Market Liquidity 
Programs: GFC and Before.” Journal of Financial Crises 2, no. 3.  
174
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 92 ---
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1120&context=journal-of-
financial-crises 
Runkel, Corey N. 2022a. “European Central Bank: Fine -Tuning Operations.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/37 
———. 2022b. “European Central Bank: Term Refinancing Operations.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/38 
———. 2022c. “Greece: Emergency Liquidity Assistance.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. 
  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/39 
———. 2022d. “Thailand: Financial Institutions Development Fund Liquidity Support.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.    
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/46 
———. 2022e. “United States: New York Clearing House, the Panic of 1907.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/61 
———. 2022f. “United States: Term Auction Facility.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/63 
———. 2022g. “Canada: Bankers’ Acceptance Purchase Facility.” Journal of Financial Crises 
4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/66 
Sablik, Tim. 2013. “The Last Crisis before the Fed.” Econ Focus Fourth Quarter 2013, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/last-crisis-fed 
Sankar, Priya. 2022a. “Canada: Private -Sector Term Purchase and Resale Agreements.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/34 
———. 2022b. “Canada: Term Loan Facility.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/35 
———. 2022c. “Canada: Term Purchase and Resale Agreement Facility.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 2.    
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/36 
Silber, William L. 2008. When Washington Shut Down Wall Street: The Great Financial Crisis 
of 1914 and the Origins of America’s Monetary Supremacy . Princeton: Princeton University  
175
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 93 ---
Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/when-washington-shut-down-wall-street-
great-financial-crisis-1914-and-origins 
Sprague, Oliver Mitchell Wentworth. 1910. History of Crises under the National Banking 
System. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/history-crises-under-national-banking-
system 
———. 1915. “The Crisis of 1914 in the United States.” American Economic Review  5 (3): 
499–533.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/crisis-1914-united-states 
Suoninen, Sakari, and Marc Jones. 2013. “How ECB’s Emergency Liquidity Assistance Works.” 
Reuters, March 21, 2013, sec. Business. Frankfurt.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20145 
Sveriges Riksbank. 2007. “International Measures to Meet Liquidity Ne eds.” Press release, 
December 12, 2007.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/international-measures-meet-liquidity-needs 
Swiss National Bank (SNB). 2007. “Swiss National Bank Provides US Dollar Funding.” Press 
release, December 12, 2007.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/swiss-national-bank-provides-us-dollar-funding 
Thornton, Henry. 1802. An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great 
Britain. London: J. Hatchard.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/enquiry-nature-and-effects-paper-credit-great-britain 
Timberlake, Richard H. 1984. “The Central Banking Role of Clearinghouse Associations.”  
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 16, no. 1: 1–15.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/central-banking-role-clearinghouse-
associations 
Trichet, Jean-Claude. 2009. “The ECB’s Enhanced Credit Support.” CESifo Working Paper No. 
2833, Monetary Policy and International Finance, October 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2586 
———. 2010. “State of the Union: The Financial Crisis and the ECB’s Response between 2007 
and 2009.” Journal of Common Market Studies 48, No. s1: 7–19.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2473 
Tucker, Paul. 2014. “The Lender of Last Resort and Modern Central Banking: Principles and 
Reconstruction.” BIS Paper No. 79.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lender-last-resort-and-modern-central-banking-
principles-and-reconstruction 
176
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.

--- Page 94 ---
US Congress. 1865. An Act to Amend an Act Entitled “An Act to Provide Internal Revenue to 
Support the Government, to Pay Interest on the Public Debt, and fo r Other Purposes,” 
Approved June Thirtieth, Eighteen Hundred and Sixty-Four. Stat. Vol. 13.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20293 
Van Der Weide, Mark E. 2020. “Lessons Learned Interview .” Interview by Matthew Lieber. 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Les sons Learned Oral History Project. September 29, 
2020. Transcript.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ypfs-lesson-learned-oral-history-project-interview-
mark-van-der-weide 
Wheelock, David C. 2008. “The Federal Response to Home Mortgage Distress: Lessons fr om 
the Great Depression.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, May/June 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20262 
Wicker, Elmus. 2000. Banking Panics of the Gilded Age . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/banking-panics-gilded-age 
Wiggins, Rosalind Z., Aidan Lawson, Steven Kelly, Lily Engbith, and Andrew Metrick. 2021. 
“The Rescue of American International Group Module Z: Overview.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 3, no. 1.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss1/8/ 
Wiggins, Rosalind  Z., and Andrew Metrick. 2020. “The Federal Reserve’s Financial Crisis 
Response A: Lending & Credit Programs for Depository Institutions.” Journal of Fina ncial 
Crises 2, no. 2.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss2/2/ 
Winters, Bill. 2012. “Review of the Bank of England’s Framework for Providing Liquidity to 
the Banking System.” Bank of England.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/review-bank-englands-framework-providing-liquidity-
banking-system 
Yale Program on Financial Stability  (YPFS). n.d. 1. “COVID-19 Financial Response Tracker 
Visualization (CFRTV).” Accessed June 21, 2022.   
https://som.yale.edu/centers/program-on-financial-stability/covid-19-tracker 
———. n.d.2. “US Government Crisis Response.” Accessed June 16, 2022.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/us-government-crisis-response 
Zorn, Lorie, Carolyn Wilkins, and Walter Engert. 2009. “Bank of Canada Liquidity Actions in 
Response to the Financial Market Turmoil.” Bank of Canada Review 2009 (Autumn).  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-canada-liquidity-actions-response-financial-
market-turmoil 
  
177
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 95 ---
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of th is material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
178
Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs Wiggins et al.