--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 2 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Mark Van Der Weide Lessons Learned: Mark Van Der Weide 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Mark Van Der Weide," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 
2, 2036-2041. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1382 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/93 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss2/93

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
Mark Van Der Weide 
By Matthew A. Lieber 
With more than two decades of continuing service at the Federal Reserve Board, Mark Van Der 
Weide brings a unique insider perspective on central bank policymaking before, during, and 
after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), including the Fed’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic 
in 2020. From 1998 to 2009, Van Der Weide served in the Fed’s legal division. Detailed to the 
Treasury Department in 2009, he helped draft the Dodd -Frank Wall Street Reform and Con-
sumer Protection Act of 2010. Back at the Fed in 2010, Van Der Weide served for eight years in 
the Division of Supervision and Regulation, where he was made deputy director, helping to im-
plement the Dodd-Frank Act and the Basel III accord, among other policies. The Board of Gov-
ernors appointed him general counsel in 2017. This “Lessons Learned” is based on an interview 
with Mr. Van Der Weide in September 2020.  
Act fast—and with overwhelming force—to stop bank runs and asset fire sales. 
Financial leaders at the Federal Reserve and the US Department of the Trea sury learned a 
clear set of lessons from the crisis of 2007–09, according to Van Der Weide. As he put it: 
Number one: act fast, don’t dilly dally. When you see a financial system heading to-
ward the abyss, do something about it rapidly; don’t waste time try ing to figure out 
what the perfect solution is. Just start acting to quell the panic. 
Second and related, you need to act with overwhelming force using your full arsenal 
of tools.  
[And third,] a prime directive in a time of financial instability is that t he central bank 
needs to stop runs and fire sales of assets. That’s the thing that can really collapse 
your economy. 
The emphasis on an immediate and forceful crisis response, Van Der Weide indicated, has 
been internalized equally by both newcomers and the  remaining veteran Fed staff who 
served in 2007–08. He shared that he felt that Fed’s response in 2020 to the COVID-19 crisis 
reflected operationalization of the lessons learned: 
I would say at a high level that the Fed’s response to the COVID crisis of 2020 has been 
good. We learned the lessons of 2008 quite well, lessons we talked about before—the 
need to act fast, to act with power, to stop the runs, and to be creative in responding 
to the unfolding events. We’ve used every tool that we had, and I think we’ve been 
quite successful in preventing the financial markets from dislocating. [ . . . ] One of my 
takeaways from the COVID event of 2020 is that at least for this particular financial 
crisis, the government’s toolkit worked quite well. 
2036

--- Page 4 ---
By contrast, in 2007–08, the Federal Reserve’s response to the crisis was more drawn out, 
for several reasons. Market events occurred in at least three waves : with mortgage market 
tremors in 2007, the failure of Bear Stearns in March 2008, and spiking with the September 
2008 respective collapse and near -collapse of Lehman Brothers and AIG, which pushed the 
financial system to the edge. Along the way, the Fed and the Treasury sought to contain the 
damage and insulate the broader economy from the mounting financial problems, interven-
ing in commercial paper and repo financing markets, and attempting to resolve failing insti-
tutions.  
In hindsight, one can see that earlier interventions by the Fed and the Treasury could have 
reduced the spread and damage of the financial crisis.  The novel forms of the challenges 
called for extraordinary actions that were hard for these institutions to take at all, let alone 
rapidly and smoothly: to study precedents and craft interventions that would be feasible, 
efficacious, and legal—and then to line up the pieces and roll them out.  
A major difficulty for the Fed was that its supervisory authority did not extend to many of 
the institutions where the problems were emerging. As Van Der Weide explained:  
A lot of the most tumultuous events of the f inancial crisis of 2008 occurred outside 
the banking system that [the Fed regulated]—Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, Merrill 
Lynch, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, AIG—all of these were companies that we did 
not regulate and that we did not supervise; we did  not have perfect visibility into 
those organizations. 
As a result, continued Van Der Weide, 
. . . At many distress points in the crisis —Bear Stearns, for example, and AIG, for ex-
ample—we got very little notice of the deep nature of the problems at those f irms. 
Days, not weeks, for Bear Stearns and AIG. 
Another challenge Van Der Weide related was addressing markets that the Fed had not tra-
ditionally regulated. For example, with commercial paper markets freezing up in October 
2008, Fed leaders recognized a clear and present danger to the financial system. They had to 
respond, but they had a basic legal issue. Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act makes 
clear that the Fed is to act as a liquidity provider and not a credit risk taker. This constraint 
had just prevented the Fed from rescuing Lehman Brothers. Van Der Weide described his 
due diligence to scrutinize the Fed’s emergency legal authorities in Section 13(3) which had 
not been invoked since the 1930s: 
I personally spent quite a bit of time in late 200 7, early 2008, in the Federal Reserve 
Board legal division’s library, poring through all the different precedents that we had 
on 13(3). There weren’t a whole lot, but we became expert on that pretty quickly as 
we saw the strains increasing.  
The Commercial Paper Funding Facility, which Van Der Weide considers the riskiest of the 
facilities the Fed did in 2007 -08, successfully reintroduced liquidity to commercial paper 
2037
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
markets, using a novel design and narrow eligibility to ensure that the Fed’s exposure was  
adequately secured.  
Under-regulated pre-crisis, the banking system is sounder today thanks to updated 
capital and liquidity standards.  
Addressing crisis prevention, Van Der Weide shared a basic takeaway from the 2007–09 cri-
sis: “We had woefully underreg ulated the global banking system.” Before the GFC, the Fed 
and other bank regulators in the United States, as well as central banks around the world, 
had not regulated the banking system as strongly as they should have, he said. This was a 
contributing factor to the GFC. The crisis revealed some particular vulnerabilities across the 
banking system, Van Der Weide explained, namely that banks did not have enough capital 
and that they had too much liquidity risk.  
To rectify these flaws, US bank regulators engaged with their global counterparts at the Basel 
Committee in Switzerland to harmonize domestic reforms. Like many of the world’s major 
economies, and under the Fed’s direction , the US implemented the Basel III accord, which 
significantly strengthened the capital requirements for banks and implemented new liquid-
ity requirements. The Basel reforms have “made banks tremendously safer,” Van Der Weide 
explained, noting that “the combination of much higher capital requirements and decently 
strict liquidity requirements has left the global banking system and the US banking system a 
lot stronger.” According to Van Der Weide, estimating conservatively, “we tripled the 
strength of bank capital requirements versus pre-crisis.”  
Regarding liquidity levels, there previously had been much more limited regulations. Indeed, 
the 2008 crisis stemmed in large part from banks holding long-term mortgage securities that 
they funded excessively with short-term liabilities. The Basel Committee’s standards require 
banks reliant on short-term funding to hold very liquid assets on their balance sheets. 
Crisis-borne capabilities and greater political support boosted the Fed’s 2020 crisis 
response. 
Empowered by new lessons and post-crisis tools, the Fed responded much more rapidly and 
effectively to the pandemic  crisis of March 2020. Van Der Weide considered the COVID -19 
response “a validation of the strength of government’s toolkit to deal with crises.” 
Within weeks, the Fed rolled out emergency lending programs that had ta ken a year to de-
ploy in the GFC . Among others, updated versions of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
(PDCF), the money market mutual fund facility, and the Commercial Paper Funding Facility 
(CPFF) kept the short-term funding markets operating.  
Having already built them once and having kept them on the shelf relatively fresh 
over the last 12 years, we were able to launch all of our short -term funding market 
facilities very quickly in 2020. We were at least able to announce them very quickly. 
2038
Lessons Learned: Mark Van Der Weide Lieber

--- Page 6 ---
In addition, the Fed was able to tweak the programs to expand their impact thanks to greater 
congressional support for the interventions. Van Der Weide noted, “in the CARES Act that 
they passed, they gave Treasury a very large sum of money to make investments in Fed emer-
gency lending programs. So, they positively promoted the establishment of our programs.” 
This contrasted greatly with 2008, when according to Van Der Weide, the relationship “was 
a little more difficult and a little more hostile.” 
The Fed’s crisis response in 2020 also saw even tighter coordination with the Treasury De-
partment because the Dodd-Frank Act required Treasury to formally pre -approve any Fed 
13(3) emergency lending facility. The Fed also did more facilities with Treasury funding in  
2020 than it did in the GFC. The Treasury’s first-loss position supported the Fed’s risk taking 
on these programs, which enabled them to be broader than they might have been without it. 
For example, the Fed expanded the CPFF to include a wider set of asse ts. Overall, the speed 
and scale of the Fed’s 2020 crisis response, in Van Der Weide’s view “was quite critical to 
restoring confidence.” 
There is more work to be done on the shadow banking system. 
While generally emphasizing the increased soundness of the  US banking system, Van Der 
Weide recognized that regulators have done less work on monitoring and reforming the 
shadow banking system. Its heterogeneity complicates efforts to establish and oversee the 
sector in a single regulatory framework; there is still much to be done. He noted that, perhaps 
partially as a result of post-GFC banking reforms, there had been some movement of activity 
from regulated banks to shadow banks, highlighting the need for greater scrutiny. 
Van Der Weide identified three trends in shadow banking activities that the Fed is monitor-
ing: 
Mortgage origination has moved significantly away from the banking system. You’ve 
seen a significant decline in the size of the trading books of the big US banks and 
movements of some of that trading activity into smaller proprietary trading firms, 
hedge funds, and some other kinds of fund vehicles. 
[ . . . ] 
Leveraged lending is something [else] to keep an eye on. It was a business the banks 
got burned on in 2008 . . . A lot more leveraged loans are b eing held on the balance 
sheets of securitization vehicles like CLOs – collateralized loan obligations – and loan 
mutual funds.  
Still, he pointed to some key successes regarding shadow banking—tightening regulation of 
derivatives markets, authorizing the Financial Stability Oversight Council to designate indi-
vidual shadow banks that become systemic, and pushing for more disclosure. In addition, 
Van Der Weide explained that the crisis revealed three particular vulnerabilities across the 
financial system: 
2039
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
In addition to banks not having enough capital and having way too much liquidity 
risk, the other thing we learned—at the top of the lessons learned list—was, we didn’t 
really have a very good failure framework to deal with large financial institutions. 
He credits Title II of Dodd-Frank, specifically its Orderly Liquidation Authority, for establish-
ing a process to resolve large nonbank financial institutions. Although the framework has 
not yet been tested by a systemically important institution’s failure, it does give regulators a 
powerful new tool that they did not have in 2008. Van Der Weide commented: “I think at 
least on paper it looks like it's an effective way to allow the failure of the next Bear Stearns 
that comes along.”  
The Fed’s broader crisis-fighting role raises questions for its independence.  
Of note during the GFC, the Fed maintained a close alignment with the Treasury Department, 
which Van Der Weide said was its main liaison to the executive branch. The Fed had several 
conversations with the Treasury before launching any of its 13(3) facilities. “We always got 
the Treasury’s informal consent,” Van Der Weide explained, noting that, “We weren’t re-
quired to by law, but we felt that given the emergency nature of those programs, the potential 
risk to the taxpayers, it was the right thing to do to get part of the elected branch of govern-
ment onboard with the programs.”  
The GFC and COVID-19 crises have seen the Fed deploy its authorities in novel and broader 
ways, which according to Van Der Weide, presented certain new concerns for Fed independ-
ence that should be carefully watched: 
The government has now acted quite powerfully two different times in the last 12 
years to avert a financial crisis, and a lot of people worry about what the long -term 
consequences might be of the central bank, of Congress, stepping in and intervening 
very powerfully in the financial markets to prevent them from collapsing.  
[ . . . ] 
This is something that we don’t have time to think about in situations like September 
2008 or March 2020, but which are very important public policy issues for us all to 
keep in mind. There certainly are long-term risks of those sorts of interventions from 
a central banking perspective. Obviously, when we have low interest rates and are 
doing massive asset purchases, there are certainly risks of asset bubbles in financial 
markets and potentially inflation. Now, the low interest rates from 2008 to 2020 did 
not generate any scary asset bubbles or excessive inflation, in my view, but past is not 
always prologue. And these are things we need to watch. 
And then the last thing I wanted to flag is that we also need to be very careful about 
potential threats to central bank independence as the Fed acts more frequently and 
in broader ways to avert financial crises. The more that the central bank is relied upon 
to solve non-traditional problems, the more the central bank is taking risks with tax-
payer money, and the more that we’re viewed as allocating credit or picking winners 
2040
Lessons Learned: Mark Van Der Weide Lieber

--- Page 8 ---
and losers, the less independence that Congress and the executive branch will be will-
ing to give the Fed. And independence is critically important to the success of a central 
bank. 
Dated: June 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-20 
2041
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2