--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F: Auto Supplier The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F: Auto Supplier 
Support Program Support Program 
Riki Matsumoto 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Matsumoto, Riki (2022) "The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F: Auto Supplier Support Program," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 256-281. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1263 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/7 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/7

--- Page 3 ---
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F:  
Auto Supplier Support Program1 
Riki Matsumoto2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
March 17, 2020; Revised Date: April 8, 2022 
Abstract 
The Global Financial Crisis that began in 2007 intensified the decade-long malaise of two of 
the largest auto manufacturers in the US, General Motors and Chrysler. Their possible 
collapse was deemed to pose a systemic risk by the United States government. In response, 
the Department of the Treasury made efforts to provide support to the automotive industry 
through the Automotive Industry Financing Program (AIFP). As US auto parts suppliers 
experienced deteriorated automotive markets, disrupted manufacturer operations, and 
stressed credit markets, the Treasury announced the Auto Supplier Support Program (ASSP) 
on March 19, 2009, as an auxiliary program to the overall AIFP. The ASSP was run through 
the two auto manufacturers and only suppliers selected by those companies could 
participate. Participating suppliers could use the program to access government financing 
for any eligible outstanding manufacturers’ receivables. The ASSP established bankruptcy -
remote special purpose vehicles (SPVs) to purchase eligible receivables from participating 
suppliers for a fee. The SPVs were funded through a cash contribution from GM and Chrysler 
and a $5 billion total loan commitment from the Treasury, authorized under the Emergency 
Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA). The program outcomes were considered mixed 
and its specific role in reducing the pressure on US auto parts suppliers is diff icult to 
 
1 This case is one of eight Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) modules considering the various elements 
of the government’s rescue of the US auto Industry and published in 2022: 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module A: Automotive Bridge Loans” by Alexander Nye. 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module B: Restructuring General Motors Through Bankruptcy” 
by Kaleb B. Nygaard. 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module C: Restructuring Chrysler Through Bankruptcy” by 
Alexander Nye. 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Indu stry, Module D: Emergency Assistance to Ally Financial (formerly 
GMAC)” by Riki Matsumoto and Kaleb B. Nygaard.  
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module E: Emergency Assistance for Chrysler Financial” by 
Alexander Nye.  
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F: Auto Supplier Support Program” by Riki Matsumoto.  
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module G: The Auto Warranty Commitment Program” by 
Benjamin Henken.  
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module Z: Overview” by Rosalind Z . Wiggins, Greg Feldberg, 
Alexander Nye, and Andrew Metrick.  
 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
256

--- Page 4 ---
determine. The ASSP was terminated in April 2010, after all loans made under the program 
were repaid. The Treasury collected $116.4 million in interest and value from the ASSP. 
Keywords: Auto Supplier Support Program, Automotive Industry Financing Program, 
Chrysler, EESA, General Motors, TARP  
257
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
At a Glance  
The US Treasury announced the Auto 
Supplier Support Program (ASSP) on March 
19, 2009. Through the ASSP, auto 
manufacturers could reassure key suppliers 
that they would be paid for their products 
(Treasury 2009b).  
The ASSP established bankruptcy-remote 
special purpose vehicles (SPV s) to purchase 
eligible receivables from participating 
suppliers for a fee (SIGTARP 2009a) . The 
SPVs were funded through a $5 billion total 
loan commitment from the Treasury, 
authorized under the Emergency Economic 
Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA) (Treasury 
2009b). G eneral Motors (GM)  and Chrysler 
also provided cash contributions set at 5% of 
Treasury’s commitment (GM Co. and 
Treasury 2009) . The GM SPV and Chrysler 
SPV received loans of $123 million and $290 
million, respectively , from the Treasury on 
April 9, 2009. The initial total commitment of 
$5 billion ($3.5 billion for GM, $1.5 billion for 
Chrysler) was reduced to $3.5 billion ($2.5 
billion for GM, $1 billion for Chrysler) on July 8, 2009. The ASSP was terminated on April 5, 
2010, for GM and on April 7, 2010, for Chrysler. All loans made under this program were 
repaid, and the Treasury col lected $116.4 million in fees and interest payments (SIGTARP 
2010). 
Summary Evaluation 
Evaluations of the ASSP were mixed, and its specific role in reducing the pressure on US auto 
parts suppliers is difficult to determine. On the outcome of the program, the Treasury stated 
that “in part due to the support provided by the Receivables Program , the auto supply base 
appears to have been stabilized” (Office of Financial Stability 2010). However, the program 
 
3 We have not been able to independently confirm the exact number of suppliers that participated or the 
amounts used. However, in July 2009 it was reported on Automotive News that 370 direct tier-1 suppliers for 
GM and 60 suppliers for Chrysler had participa ted in the ASSP  (Roland 2009). As the ASSP was terminated in 
April 2010, the ultimate number may have been different. 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: The Auto Supplier Support Program was 
intended to provide liquidity and improve access to 
credit to auto suppliers by allowing them to sell 
eligible receivables from manufacturers to the 
SPVs. 
Announcement 
date 
March 19, 2009  
Operational date April 9, 2009  
Expiration date April 5, 2010 (GM), April 7, 
2010 (Chrysler)  
Legal authority Emergency Economic 
Stabilization Act of 2008  
Maximum amount 
authorized 
$5 billion, reduced to $3.5 
billion ($2.5 billion for GM, 
$1 billion for Chrysler) 
Peak utilization  GM Supplier Receivables LLC 
($290 million); Chrysler 
Receivables SPV, LLC 
($123.1 million)  
Participants Approx. 370 Tier 1 base 
suppliers for GM & 60 for 
Chrysler3  
Administrators US Department of Treasury, 
Citibank (servicer) 
 
Auto Supplier Support Program 
 
258
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 6 ---
was criticized by industry analysts and supplier trade associations as being limited in scope; 
furthermore, the third -party servicer, Citiban k, was criticized as having issues in loading 
purchase orders and generating a lot of confusion among suppliers (MEMA 2009). 
259
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
Auto Supplier Support Program: United States Context 2008–2009 
GDP 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted 
to USD) 
$14,559.5 billion in 2008 
$14,628.0 billion in 2009 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted 
to USD) 
$48,383 in 2008 
$47,100 in 2009 
Sovereign credit rating (5-year senior 
debt) 
 
As of Q4, 2008: 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
 
As of Q4, 2009: 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
Size of banking system 
 
$9,938.3 billion in total assets in 2008 
$9,789.1 billion in total assets in 2009 
Size of banking system as a percentage 
of GDP 
 
68.3% in 2008 
66.9% in 2009 
Size of banking system as a percentage 
of financial system 
 
30.5% in 2008 
30.2% in 2009 
5-bank concentration of banking 
system 
 
45% in 2008 
44% in 2009 
Foreign involvement in banking 
system 
18% in 2008 
16% in 2009 
Government ownership of banking 
system 
0% in 2008 
0% in 2009 
Existence of deposit insurance 
100% insurance on deposits up to 
$250,000 in 2008 
100% insurance on deposits up to 
$250,000 in 2009 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation; World Bank, Bank Regulation and Supervision Survey. 
 
 
260
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 8 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
The Global Financial Crisis that began in 2007 with the decline in the United States subprime 
mortgage markets quickly spread beyond the financial sector and eventually reached the US 
automotive industry as credit markets tightened. Consequently, the finan cial crisis 
intensified a decades -long decline of two of the largest US auto manufacturers, General 
Motors Company (GM) and Chrysler Group LLC (Chrysler), leading to a massive 
restructuring and bankruptcy for both (Klier and Rubenstein 2012) . At the time, GM and 
Chrysler’s possible collapse was considered “a potentially crippling blow to the American 
economy that the Treasury estimated would eliminate nearly 1.1 million jobs” (COP 2009). 
Due to the interdependent nature of the US auto industry, there was a significant risk of 
contagion beyond GM and Chrysler to the vast and interconnected network of parts suppliers 
that also supported other manufacturers. For example, the Motor and Equipment 
Manufacturers Association (MEMA) released data in 2009 showing that  66 percent of 
Chrysler suppliers were also suppliers to GM and 54 percent were suppliers to Ford, the 
second-largest US auto manufacturer.4 Furthermore, many of the largest auto suppliers such 
as Lear, American Axle, and Visteon were in dire financial shape , and hundreds of suppliers 
were known to be teetering on the edge (Goolsbee and Kruger 2015) . The ongoing crisis 
placed unprecedented str ess on the US automotive parts suppliers and consequently, the 
overall restructuring process of GM and Chrysler that was being overseen by the US 
Department of Treasury (Treasury 2009b).5 
In normal times, the manufacturer purchase d goods and services from  suppliers and 
promised to pay 45  to 60 days after the shipment (see Figure 1 , step 1 ). In the interim, 
suppliers used the receivables from their transaction s with the manufacturers as collateral 
for supplier bank loans, repaying the loans once the manufacturers paid the receivables (see 
Figure 1, step 2) (Klier and Rubenstein 2012). The transactions between manufacturers and 
suppliers were typically managed by supply chain servicers , such as Citibank (see Figure 1 , 
step 3) (SIGTARP 2009a). 
 
4 While Ford Motor Company also experienced distress during the financial crisis, it was considered to be 
significantly more prepared and did not receive support from the Treasury through the Automotive Industry 
Financing Program (Klier and Rubenstein 2012). 
5 Refer to other YPFS cases on the US Automotive Industry Financing Program for more information  at 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
261
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1: Structure of “Business-as-Usual” Operations 
 
Sources: Klier and Rubenstein 2012; SIGTARP 2009a. 
However, the crisis threatened this fundamental relationship between manufacturers and 
suppliers in three main ways: it tightened receivable s payment terms, disrupted 
manufacturer operations, and decreased credit for suppliers. First, suppliers tighten ed 
receivables payment terms because of uncertainty surrounding the abili ty of GM and 
Chrysler to pay. The typical payment terms of 45 to 60 days after shipment were shortened 
by suppliers, at times requiring cash on delivery, or even advance payment. This negatively 
affected the restructuring processes of GM and Chrysler, as i t meant the manufacturers 
needed to hold significantly more cash on hand (SIGTARP 2009a). 
Second, the tightening receivables terms by suppliers disrupted the ability of GM and 
Chrysler to produce automobiles on a normal schedule. GM and Chrysler were alrea dy 
experiencing constricted credit markets and numerous other legacy problems , such as 
production overcapacity. This came in addition to their facing  massively complex 
restructurings and possibly bankruptcy at the time. The manufacturers’ inability to maintain 
normal production schedules potentially endangered the suppliers due to their high 
concentration in supplying the manufacturers and their very interconnected cycle (SIGTARP 
2009a). 
Last, banks were less willing to extend credit based on the suppliers’ receivables due to the 
uncertainty surrounding GM and Chrysler. Supplier banks/lenders were not certain that the 
suppliers would be able to collect the funds owed in the event GM and Chrysler were unable 
to honor obligations. Moreover, the general tightening of standards and adverse lender risk 
appetite for commercial and industrial loans (see Figure 2) during the crisis, meant suppliers 
faced significant difficulties accessing credit (Federal Reserve n.d.1; Federal Reserve n.d.2). 
262
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2: Supplier Sentiment Index   
 
Source: Bizologie 2011. 
Program Description 
On March 19, 2009, the Treasury announced a $5 billion commitment ($3.5 billion for GM, 
$1.5 billion for Chrysler) to a new Auto Supplier Support Program (ASSP), to “help stabilize 
the auto supply base and restore credit flows in a critical sector of the A merican economy” 
(Treasury 2009b; SIGTARP 2010) . The ASSP was intended to provide credit for eligible 
suppliers and “contemplates the guarantee, or early payment, of qualified automotive 
receivables through [a manufacturer’s] establishment of a bankruptcy -remote special 
purpose vehicle funded with loans from the US Treasury and capital contributions from the 
[manufacturer]” (Chrysler 2009a). 
The ASSP was auxiliary to the government’s overall effort to support the US auto industry 
under the Automotive Indust ry Financing Program (AIFP)  and was authorized under the 
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA) (Treasury n.d.).6 
 
6 Refer to other YPFS cases on the US Automotive Industry Financing Program for more information about the 
other elements of support at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
263
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
ASSP Structure and Operation  
Although aimed at the specific difficulties being experienced by suppliers, the ASSP was 
structured to be implemented by, and at the option of, participating manufacturers. This 
meant that decisions about which suppliers and which receivables would receive  financing 
were made by the participating manufacturers (SIGTARP 2009a).  
Any domestic auto manufacturer was eligible to participate in the ASSP, although it should 
be noted that GM and Chrysler were the only participants (COP 2009). A manufacturer that 
chose to participate would first request a funding allocation from the Treasury (Department 
of the Treasury 2009a). If accepted, the participating manufacturer was required to establish 
the receivables purchase program through a special purpose vehicle (SPV) (namely Chrysler 
Receivables SPV, LLC and GM Receivables SPV LLC) that was a bankruptcy -remote, wholly 
owned subsidiary of the participating manufacturer (see step 1 in Figure 3) (SIGTARP 
2009a). 
Figure 3: Structure of Auto Supplier Support Program (ASSP) 
 
Sources: Chrysler and Treasury 2009b; COP 2009; Treasury 2009a; SIGTARP 2009a. 
The Treasury’s assistance came in the form of a loan commitment to the SPV at an annual 
interest rate equal to the greater of LIBOR or 2 percent, plus 3.5 percent (see Figure 3 , step 
2). Interest was payable monthly or at the repayment of the loan principal. Unpaid interest 
would continue to accrue interest thereon until paid (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b). 
The participating manufacturer was required to provide an up -front cash commitment of 5 
percent of the Treasury’s total commitment to the SPV prior to, or concurrent with , any 
264
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 12 ---
Treasury loan (SIGTARP 2009a). Based on that requirement, Chrysler injected $50 million 
in cash into its SPV and GM injected $125 million (Chrysler 2009a; GM 2009). 
The Treasury loans were due, with any accrued interest, on the maturity date, which was set 
at one year from the date of closing, although the Treasury could extend this date (Chrysler 
and Treasury 2009b). 
Funding 
On April 3, 2009, Chrysler Receivables SPV , LLC and GM Supplier Receivables LLC, were 
formed as bankruptcy-remote, wholly-owned subsidiaries to facilitate the ASSP. To fund the 
purchases of receivables and operate the ASSP, the Treasury made loans of $123 million to 
the Chrysler SPV and $290 million to the GM SPV on April 9, 2009. The initial total 
commitment of $5  billion was reduced to $3.5 billion on July 8, 2009 —$2.5 billion for GM 
and $1  billion for Chrysler  (SIGTARP 2010) . By this date, most suppliers had been paid 
during the course of the manufacturers’ bankruptcies , and a diminished amount of activity 
was expected under the program going forward. See Figure 4 for an overview of funding. 
Figure 4: Funding of SPVs 
 
Source: SIGTARP 2010. 
New Chrysler 
Treasury and Chrysler Receivables SPV , LLC entered into a Credit Agreement dated as of 
April 7, 2009, under which the ASSP loan was extended (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b).7  
During the bankruptcy process of Chrysler, a Section 363 Transaction of the US Bankruptcy 
Code was executed to allow th e corporations that would come out of the processes as the 
new operating companies —known as New Chrysler—to purchase all equity interests in 
their respective SPVs and assume all obligations under the original Credit Agreement.8 
 
7 Reference is made in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to a Security Agreement entered into 
seemingly concurrently with the original Credit Agreement, but we have not been able to locate this document.  
8 Refer to our other YPFS cases on the US Automotive Industry Financing Program for more information about 
the other elements of support at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
265
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
Therefore, New Chrysler, Treasury , and Citibank entered into an Amended and Restated 
Credit Agreement superseding the original Credit Agreement of April 7, 2009 (Chrysler and 
Treasury 2009b). 
The parties also entered into a pledge agreement (effective as of the date of t he bankruptcy 
sale, June 10, 2009, but executed on September 24, 2009) whereby the obligations of 
Chrysler SPV obligations to the Treasury and Citibank were secured with a pledge from New 
Chrysler (see Figure 3, step 4). In the pledge agreement, Citibank, acting as a collateral agent 
and custodian on behalf of itself and Treasury, continued to hold the first priority security 
interest in the following property of the manufacturers: (1) all investment property, capital 
stock, etc.; (2) all cash, interest, di vidends, etc.; (3) all right, title, and interest of the 
manufacturer in the receivables, and associated proceeds as part of the pledgor.9 Despite the 
pledge to Citibank, Treasury retained ultimate authority with respect to management of the 
pledged collateral (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b). 
The ASSP was serviced by a third -party servicer, Citibank, which was designated by the 
manufacturers. Under the Servicing Agreement between Citibank and Chrysler (also 
amended and restated in September 2009), Citibank’s role was to manage, service, 
administer, and collect on receivables, and to act as the collateral agent (see Figure 3 , step 
3). The SPVs were required to pay administrative “Servicer Fees,” which was the product of 
the Servicing Fee Rate (1/12 of 0.25  percent) and the average daily aggregate outstanding 
principal balance of all receivables held by the SPV each month (Chrysler and Treasury 
2009b). 
Payment Terms Available to Participating Suppliers 
In the operation of the ASSP, suppliers had two options for funding receivables: Payment 
Option 1, immediate payment, or Payment Option 2, payment on maturity (see Figure 5). If 
the suppliers opted for Payment Option 1, or immediate payment, they could sell the 
receivable before a normal payment term to the SPV at a 3 percent (notional value) discount 
from face value. The SPV would then seek payment from the manufacturer for the full 
amount originally due to the supplier at maturity (SIGTARP 2009a).  
If the supplier opted for Payment Option 2, or payment on maturity, the supplier received 
the payment, less a 2 percent discount (notional), from the SPV upon maturity of the normal 
payment term of 45  to 60 days. If the manufacturer failed to pay the receivable, the SPV 
would fund the payment to the supplier. The SPV would then seek payment of the receivable 
from the manufacturer (SIGTARP 2009a) . T he manufacturer was required to remit all 
payments in respect of purchased receivables to the collateral account controlled by the 
collateral agent, Citibank, on behalf of the SPV (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b).  
 
9 For a full list of pledged collateral used to secure the SPVs obligations, please refer to the Exhibit N Pledge 
Agreement document in the Credit Agreement, under the Implementation Documents.  Also see Exhibit I: 
Program Terms for a full list of supplier eligibility requirements (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b). 
266
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 5: Payment Options 
 
Source: SIGTARP 2009a. 
Termination 
At the termination of the program (in other words, the Final Distribution Date), all proceeds 
available in the collateral account were required to be distributed by the collateral agent, 
Citibank, at the direction of the Treasury (see Figure 3, step 6). The distribution of proceeds 
in the collateral account was mandated by the Treasury in order of priority, “the Waterfall ,” 
agreed to by the manufacturers. As part of the Waterfall, the manufacturers were required 
to pay an “Exit Fee” and “Contingent Interest. ” The Exit Fee was equal to 4 percent of the 
amount of the total commitment, and the Contingent Interest was 50 percent of the amount 
remaining in the collateral account. As per the Waterfall order, the SPV was the first to take 
any losses from the ASSP (GM Co. and Treasury 2009).10 
The terms of the credit agreement between the Treasury and the SPVs established by GM 
and Chrysler also contained provisions related to compliance and accountability 
mechanisms, as was required for all EESA programs utilizing TARP funds. Inspection rights 
were given to the  Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief 
Program (SIGTARP), Government Accountability Office (GAO), and the Treasury (GM Co. and 
Treasury 2009). Last, the ASSP was expected to operate for up to one year, with an extension 
possible at the Treasury’s direction (SIGTARP 2009a). 
Outcomes 
Overall, more than 370 tier-1 suppliers (providing direct material) for GM and about 60 
suppliers for Chrysler participated in the program (Roland 2009). The Treasury received 
back the full principal it had lent, a total of $413 million, as well as $116.4 million in fees and 
interest payments, $65.6 million from GM and $50.7 million from Chrysler. The ASSP was 
terminated on April 5, 2010, for GM and on April 7, 2010, for Chrysler. All loans made under 
this program were repaid with interest and fees (SIGTARP 2010). 
A Congressional Oversight Panel (COP) report found that by 2011 the automotive supplier 
industry had consolidated considerably (COP 2011).  
 
10 For more details on the Waterfall, please refer to Section 5, “Collateral Account and Application of Proceeds,” 
in the Security Agreement under the Implementation Documents (GM Co. and Treasury 2009). 
267
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
Furthermore, the auto supplier industry’s capacity utilization rate, an indicator of the 
degree to which an enterprise uses its ability to produce, is currently 60.5 percent. 
While this figure is significantly higher than it was at its trough of 45.9 percent during 
the crisis, it remains notably lower than the pre -crisis level, when it was typically 
above 70 percent. This has led to ongoing consolidation of the supplier industry. Ford, 
GM, and Chrysler have announced reductions of 53, 30, and 50 percent, respectively, 
in their direct supply bases. 
Figure 6: Automotive Supplier Support Program Metrics (in $ millions) 
Entity A. Original 
commitment 
B. Adjusted 
commitment 
C. Amount 
drawn down 
D. Interest 
paid 
E. Proceeds 
from 
additional 
notes 
F. Total of D 
and E 
GM 
Receivables 
LLC 
$3,500 $2,500 $290.0 $9.1 $56.5 $65.6 
Chrysler 
Receivables 
SPV, LLC 
$1,500 $1,000 $123.1 $5.8 $44.5 $50.3 
Total $5,000 $3,500 $413.1 $14.9 $101.1 $115.9 
Source: COP 2011. 
II. Key Design Decisions 
1. The ASSP was part of a larger effort by the government to stabilize major auto 
manufacturers and restructure the industry.  
The Obama administration announced the ASSP in a press release with the goal to “help 
stabilize the auto supply base and restore credit flows in a critical sector of the American 
economy” to support the overall auto industry. As the auto industry underwent substantia l 
restructuring, the Presidential Task Force on the Auto Industry recognized that a functioning 
auto industry relies on viable manufacturers and a network of suppliers (Treasury 2009b). 
The Treasury was concerned that supplier instability caused by tighten ing receivables 
conditions, manufacturer disruptions, and decreased credit availability would create greater 
uncertainty and “short -circuit restructuring efforts at companies like GM and Chrysler” 
(Treasury 2009a). 
268
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 16 ---
2. The Treasury established the ASSP with authorization from the Emergency 
Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 because of the suppliers’ importance to GM 
and Chrysler.  
The ASSP was established by the Treasury pursuant to the authority granted to it under the 
EESA (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b) . The Treasury recognized that the manufacturers’ 
business of producing autos relied on a functioning supplier base. Since the collapse of GM 
and Chrysler was perceived by the Treasury to have systemic implications through 
contagion risk to the rest of the  domestic auto industry, support of their supplier base was 
considered crucial (Treasury 2009b). 
3. The government chose to establish the ASSP, despite industry calls for different 
types of assistance.  
Although Auto Industry Financing Program ( AIFP) was the formal program receiving 
funding under and authorized by EESA to assist the auto industry using TARP funds, the 
program itself served more as a line item that could encompass Treasury’s various loans and 
investments in the auto industry within TAR P documentation. The AIFP appeared on the 
Treasury website weeks after the Bridge Loans.  
Prior to the establishment of the ASSP, the Original Equipment Suppliers Association (OESA) 
had requested $18.5 billion of support for its supplier members through three forms : (i) 
payments for parts shipped in 10 days rather than the standard 45, (ii) a government 
guarantee of supplier receivables, and (iii) federally backed bridge loan guarantees (Beene 
2009). The ASSP’s $5 billion was not only a fraction of the requested $18.5 billion, but it also 
made the manufacturers the arbiters of which suppliers would indirectly receive the benefit 
of government assistance; there was no avenue for a supplier to independently choose to 
access such assistance if a participating manufacturer, GM or Chrysler , did not designate 
them as a participant (SIGTARP 2009a). (See also Key Design Decision No. 8 and Evaluation.) 
GM and Chrysler both included support for suppliers in their viability plans (Canis et al. 
2009). Rattner (2011) described one such plan as a  “far more ambitious” idea for dealing 
with the suppliers, “a kind of mini-TARP—a fund to provide so-called debtor-in-possession, 
or DIP, financing for suppliers that declared bankruptcy.” However, describing their ultimate 
decision, Rattner (2011) said:  
Once we drew the line on federal intervention, the supply base was forced to merge, 
shrink, and otherwise restructure itself to a size that realistically reflected the industry’s 
prospects. And we were faithful to our goal of saving only those jobs for which there was 
sound economic justification. 
4. The Treasury made a maximum commitment of $5 billion for the ASSP, which was 
soon reduced , as most suppliers were paid during the manufacturers’ 
bankruptcies.  
The initial commitment ceiling of $5 billion ($3.5 billion for GM and $1.5 billion for Chrysler 
respectively) was announced on March 19, 2009 (Treasury 2009b) . However, on July 8, 
269
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
2009, at the request of GM and Chrysler, the original commitments were redu ced to $2.5 
billion and $1 billion respectively, for a total of $3.5 billion (see Figure 6). Under the original 
Credit Agreement between the Treasury and the SPVs, the Treasury commitments could be 
decreased if the outstanding amounts did not exceed the co mmitments made on the 
“Commitment Ceiling Reset Date” of June 30, 2009. The original commitments were reduced 
because most suppliers had been paid during the course of the manufacturers’ bankruptcies, 
and a diminished amount of activity was expected under the program going forward 
(SIGTARP 2009b). 
5. The participating manufacturer was required to make a cash contribution to its 
ASSP program in addition to the Treasury loan. 
To facilitate the ASSP, the SPVs were funded by the Treasury loans and cash contributions 
from participating manufacturers (GM Co. and Treasury 2009) . The commitment ceiling 
refers to the maximum obligation of the Treasury to make loans to the SPV (Chrysler and 
Treasury 2009a). Under the terms of the loan agreement, the manufacturers were required 
to make a cash contribution to the SPVs as a condition precedent to the obligation of the 
Treasury to make good on the loan commitment. The Treasury’s loan agreem ent outlined 
that the aggregate principal loan amount should not exceed the lesser of the commitment 
ceiling or an amount equal to the aggregate cash capital contribution made by the 
manufacturer to the SPV multiplied by 20 ( GM Co. and Treasury 2009 ). The Treasury loan 
had priority over any recovery for the manufacturer. Based on that requirement, Chrysler 
injected $50 million in cash into its SPV and GM injected $125 million (Chrysler 2009a; GM 
2009). 
6. The program utilized bankruptcy-remote special purpose vehicles. 
To facilitate the ASSP, SPVs were formed as bankruptcy-remote, wholly owned subsidiaries 
of their respective participating manufacturers (SIGTARP 2009a) . At the time of the  
announcement of the ASSP by the Treasury, GM, and Chrysler had n ot yet filed for 
bankruptcy but there was considerable uncertainty surrounding the viability of the 
restructuring process (Treasury 2009b; Office of Public Affairs 2013) . Thus, to reassure 
suppliers and creditors, the ASSP utilized bankruptcy -remote SPVs. The SPVs were 
structured such that, in the event of a bankruptcy filing by the participating manufacturer, 
the SPV would be able to continue financing receivables, while the manufacturer continued 
to operate under bankruptcy protection (SIGTARP 2009a).  
7. Citibank was appointed as the servicer, paying agent, and collateral manager. 
Under the Servicing Agreement, the SPVs appointed Citibank as the servicer. The servicer 
handled the daily administrative processing tasks required under the ASSP. Duties included 
collecting and posting of all payments; responding to inquiries of suppliers; and monitoring 
the collateral account, processed payment instructions, and delivered payment notifications. 
They also accounted for collections and furnished monthly statements to the SPVs with 
respect to collections and remittances (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b). 
270
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 18 ---
8. The financial obligations of the SPVs to the Treasury and Citi bank were secured 
by a pledge agreement from their respective manufacturers. 
The manufacturers granted to the collateral agent, Citibank, a continuing first priority 
security interest in their pledged collateral to secure the SPVs’ financial obligations to  the 
secured parties (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b).  
9. Although aimed at the specific difficulties being experienced by suppliers, the 
ASSP was structured to be implemented by, and at the option of, the 
manufacturers. 
All domestic manufacturers were eligible to participate in the ASSP, however, only GM and 
Chrysler chose to do so (COP 2009). The ASSP was available only to suppliers that were 
specifically designated for enrollment by participating manufacturers. This allowed GM and 
Chrysler to decide which suppliers were the most important to the overall restructuring 
effort and their particular business needs. Some critics claimed that this limited the 
program’s scope to the detriment of non-GM and Chrysler suppliers (MEMA 2009). Chrysler 
sent a letter to its suppliers saying that the “government loan associated with this program 
is not large enough to permit all of Chrysler’s US -based suppliers to participate. ” GM noted 
that its tier-1 direct suppliers were eligible but its “approxim ately 16,000 indirect North 
American suppliers —who sell to the tier-1 manufacturers or provide GM with 
nonmanufacturing services, such as healthcare and information technology —are generally 
not eligible” (Canis et al. 2009). 
10. Participating suppliers could opt for payment on maturity at a 2 percent charge 
or for immediate payment at a 3 percent charge.  
Suppliers participating in the ASSP could choose one of two payment options as outlined in 
Exhibit F , Supplier Purchase Agreement , in the Credit Agreement (Chrysler and Treasury 
2009a). Payment Option 1, or immediate payment, required a discount charge equal to 3 
percent (notional) of the receivables face value. This allowed suppliers to access expedited 
payments, in the case that immediate liquidity was necessary. Payment Option 2, or payment 
on maturity, required a discount charge equal to 2 percent (notional) of the receivables’ face 
value (SIGTARP 2009a). See Figure 4. 
Despite the original March 19, 2009, Treasury press release indicating that the suppliers 
would “pay a small fee” (Treasury 2009b) , the fee was specifically designed : to “instill 
market discipline, we had made the money so expensive that suppliers thought twice before 
signing up” (Rattner 2011) . The expensive fee was also cited in Chrysler’s bankruptcy 
motion, “other suppliers, moreover, may be unwilling to accept the discount from face value 
that accompanies tender of receivables to the Receivables SPV” (Chrysler 2009a).  
11. Receivables had significant eligibility requirements.  
The eligibility requirements for the receivables were outlined in the Exhibit I , Program 
Terms, in the Credit Agreement (Chrysler and Treasury 2009b) . To be eligible, the 
receivables must have originated after March 19, 2009. All receivables purchased after May 
271
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
4, 2009, must have originated not more than 20 days prior to the receivable s purchase date 
and have a due date at least 30 days after the date of its origination and  no later than the 
earlier of (a) the date occurring 90 days after the date of its origination and (b) the date two 
business days prior to the maturity date. Eligible receivables were required to be the 
exclusive property of the supplier, free and clear of  all security interests, liens, or claims of 
any kind (GM Co. and Treasury 2009).  
12.  SPVs were required to pay interest on the Treasury loan under the terms of the 
Credit Agreement with Treasury. 
As stipulated in Section 2.05, Interest Rates and Payment Dates, Article 2, Amount and Terms 
of Commitment, of the Credit Agreement, the Treasury’s loan carried an interest rate at a 
rate per annum equal to the greater of (a) LIBOR or (b) 2 percent, plus 3.5 percent (Chrysler 
and Treasury 2009b).  
13.  As required by law, Special Notes were issued by the SPVs so the Treasury could 
benefit from upside gains. 
The Congressional Oversight Panel outlines why these special/additional notes were issued. 
They  
were financial instruments that Treasury took from the Chrysler and GM SPVs as part of 
their agreement to participate in the program; the notes provided Treasu ry the 
opportunity to recognize upside gains on its investments. As dictated in the legislation 
that created the TARP, the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act, financial instruments 
such as warrants were to be provided to Treasury in consideration for its investment in 
participating institutions. As the law states, instruments such as warrants, or additional 
debentures in the case of the ASSP, were created ‘to provide for reasonable participation 
by the Secretary, for the benefit of taxpayers, in equity ap preciation in the case of a 
warrant or other equity security, or a reasonable interest rate premium, in the case of a 
debt instrument’ (COP 2011). 
14.  Oversight of the manufacturers was extended to the suppliers as part of the ASSP. 
Inspection rights and access to personnel were given to the Office of the Special Inspector 
General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, Government Accountability Office, and the 
Treasury (SIGTARP 2009a; GM Co. and Treasury 2009). It was noted that, “Treasury will also 
receive periodic certifications from the suppliers to ensure compliance with the program’s 
requirements” (SIGTARP 2009a).  
One significant difference between the requirements the manufacturers were under 
compared to that for the suppliers was outlined in a SIGTA RP report: “Although the auto 
manufacturers that participate in ASSP are bound by the EESA executive compensation 
limits, Treasury is not requiring the suppliers, even though they are obvious beneficiaries of 
the program, to be bound by the same restrictions” (SIGTARP 2009a). 
272
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 20 ---
III. Evaluation  
Evaluations of the ASSP have been mixed, and its specific role in reducing the pressure on US 
auto parts suppliers is difficult to determine. The Treasury considered the ASSP to be 
generally successful while industry participants and supplier associations criticized the 
structural complications, control of eligibility by manufacturers, and high compliance costs 
of the program. 
On the outcome of the program, the Treasury has stated that “in part due to the support 
provided by the Receivables Program, the auto supply base appears to have been stabilized. 
Suppliers are now breaking even at a lower level of North American productions” (Office of 
Financial Stability 2010) . Steve Rattner, Counselor to the Secretary of the Tre asury at the 
time, commented on the reduction of the initial $5 billion to $3.5 billion : “given the general 
success of the [ASSP], a much lower amount was needed to stabilize the supplier base” 
(Rattner 2011). 
The Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Associatio n (MEMA), testifying before the Senate 
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Economic Policy Subcommittee in 2009, 
noted that the ASSP “did help prevent widespread loan covenant violations and demands for 
changes in customer payment terms” and that “without a doubt, the US Treasury Auto 
Supplier Support Program helped avert a potential implosion of the supply base” (MEMA 
2009).  
However, MEMA also roundly criticized the ASSP. First, MEMA stated in the ir Senate 
testimony that beyond the direct suppliers to GM and Chrysler, the broader supplier base 
“found themselves without access to the program.” This included “small suppliers, suppliers 
manufacturing in the US, and shipping to Canada and Mexico and suppliers directly providing 
replacement and warranty parts and tooling” (MEMA 2009). In contrast , as mentioned in 
Key Design Decision No. 10, Rattner  (2011) insists that the restr ictively high fee was 
designed to “instill market discipline, we had made the money so expensive that suppliers 
thought twice before signing up. ” Rattner’s idea was that the limited size of the program 
helped ensure that, despite the inevitable downsizing of the industry , GM and Chrysler’s 
needs were met. 
Second, a survey by the Original Equipment Suppliers Association (OESA) indicated that 
while “half of the direct suppliers to GM and/or Chrysler were eligible to participate, only 
half of those eligible su ppliers were actually able to take part in the program. ” The MEMA 
testified that this was due to technical issues in loading the thousands of purchase orders 
into Citibank’s system (MEMA 2009). At the time, Citibank was the third -party servicer 
providing a software system called Citi Supplier Finance to administer the ASSP (Chrysler 
and Treasury 2009b). 
Industry analysts and media reports also had different views on the success of the program. 
Participation in the ASSP was considered to be relatively limited, according to media reports, 
which stated that GM had aided slightly more than 370 tier-1 direct material suppliers and 
273
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 21 ---
Chrysler about 60.11 This was about a quarter of the approximately 1,800 tier-1 suppliers to 
GM and Chrysler according to figures from the OESA. The disclosures of participation 
numbers prompted criticism of the program by US auto industry analysts, who deemed it 
“inadequate” (Roland 2009). Another report stated that the $5 billion in support had been a 
fraction of the $18.5 billion formally requested by the OESA. The original $18.5 billion 
request included: (i) payments for parts shipped in 10 days rather than the standard 45, (ii) 
a government guarantee of supplier receivables,  and (iii) federally  backed bridge loan 
guarantees (Beene 2009). 
Criticism was also aimed at the fees and compliance costs associated with participation in 
the program. Stephen Gross, a lawyer who represented about 30 suppliers, stated that fees 
amounted to “hundreds of thousands of dollars apiece for some suppliers” (Roland 2009). 
The 2 percent discount for 60 day receivables protected under the ASSP added up to a 12 
percent annualized rate, which was considered to be expensive. The high cost in terms of 
compliance was also noted. Joe Bione, a workout specialist and president of the Whitehall 
Group, a management and consulting company based in in Troy, Michigan , and specializing 
in suppliers, stated “the paperwork was unbelievable. ” Last, Citibank, the thir d-party 
servicer, was criticized as being “slow to gear up and generating a lot of confusion” by Walter 
Borda, a partner with Borda, Lorenz & Geggie in Novi, Michigan, a corporate and business 
planning law firm that had ASSP participants as clients (Sherefkin 2010). 
According to Neil De Koker, president of the OESA, it is also important to note that less than 
100 Chrysler suppliers were processed, partly because the manufacturer went through the 
bankruptcy process so quickly. Furthermore, a number of suppliers to GM and Chrysler were 
considered “critical vendors” and consequently fully paid during the bankruptcy, which may 
have also impacted participation numbers (Sherefkin 2010). As defined in Chrysler’s debtor-
in-possession (DIP) loan agreement with the Treasury, critical vendor payments were made 
to ensure that troubled vendors that were critical to the production plan were operating to 
supply parts to the manufacturer going through bankruptcy (Chrysler 2009b).  
Other concerns related to the ASSP include a SIGTARP report (2009a) which highlighted:  
vulnerability borne from the structure of the [ASSP], which empowered the automobile 
manufacturers with unfettered discretion to choose which suppliers and at what 
amounts the suppliers can participate in the program —effectively picking winners and 
losers with no clear restrictions. 
 
11 YPFS has not been able to independently confirm the exact number of suppliers that participated or the 
amounts used. However, in July 2009 it was reported on Autom otive News that 370 direct tier-1 suppliers for 
GM and 60 suppliers for Chrysler had participated in the ASSP. As the ASSP was terminated in April 2010, the 
real number may have been different from the 430 total. 
274
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 22 ---
IV. References 
Beene, Ryan. 2009. “Federal Supplier -Support Program Launched Today.” Crain’s Detroit 
Business, April 10, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/federal-supplier-support-program-launched-
today. 
Bizologie. 2011. “OESA: Auto Supplier Barometer.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/oesa-auto-supplier-barometer. 
Canis, Bill, James Bickley, Hinda Chaikind, Car ol Pettit, Patrick Purcell, Carol Rapaport, and 
Gary Shorter. 2009. “U.S. Motor Vehicle Industry: Federal Financial Assistance and 
Restructuring.” R40003. Congressional Research Service.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-motor-vehicle-industry-federal-financial-assistance-
and-restructuring. 
Chrysler LLC. 2009a. “Motion of Debtors and Debtors in Possession.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/motion-debtors-and-debtors-possession-orders-
authorizing-them-pay-prepetition-claims. 
———. 2009b. “Second Lien Secured Priming Superprio rity Debtor -in-Possession Credit 
Agreement.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3810. 
Chrysler LLC, and US Department of the Treasury  (Chrysler and Treasury) . 2009a. “Credit 
Agreement between Chrysler as Borrower and United States Department of the Treasury, as 
Lender.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/credit-agreement-between-chrysler-borrower-and-
united-states-department-treasury-lender. 
———. 2009b. “Amended and Restated Credit Agreement between Chrysler as Borrower 
and United States Department of the Treasury.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/amended-and-restated-credit-agreement-between-
chrysler-borrower-and-united-states. 
Congressional Oversight Panel (COP). 2009. “September Oversight Report.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/september-oversight-report-use-tarp-funds-support-
and-reorganization-domestic-automotive. 
———. 2011. “January Oversight Report.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/congressional-oversight-panel-january-oversight-
report-update-tarp-support-domestic. 
Federal Reserve. n.d. 1. “Net Percentage of Domestic Banks Tightening Standards for 
Commercial and Industrial Loans to Large and Middle-Market Firms (DRTSCILM).”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/net-percentage-domestic-banks-tightening-standards-
commercial-and-industrial-loans-large. 
275
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 23 ---
———. n.d.2. “Net Percentage of Domestic Banks Tightening Standards for Commercial and 
Industrial Loans to Small Firms (DRTSCIS).”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/net-percentage-domestic-banks-tightening-standards-
commercial-and-industrial-loans-small. 
General Motors Company, and US Department of the Treasury (GM Co. and Treasury). 2009. 
“Amended and Restated Credit Agreement.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/amended-and-restated-credit-agreement-between-
general-motors-borrower-and-united-states. 
General Motors Corporation (GM). 2009. “Form S-4 Registration Statement.” Securities a nd 
Exchange Commission.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gm-form-s-4-registration-statement-april-27-2009. 
Goolsbee, Austan, and Alan Kruger. 2015. “A Retrospective Look at Rescuing and 
Restructuring General Motors and Chrysler.” NBER Working Paper Series, March.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/retrospective-look-rescuing-and-
restructuring-general-motors-and-chrysler. 
Klier, Thomas H., and James Rubenstein. 2012. “Detroit Back from the Brink? Auto Industry 
Crisis and Restructuring, 2008–11.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/detroit-back-brink-auto-industry-crisis-and-
restructuring-2008-11. 
Motor & Equipment Manufacturers Association  (MEMA). 2009. Restoring Credit to 
Manufacturers.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/testimony-motor-equipment-manufacturers-
association-senate-committee-banking-housing-and. 
Office of Financial Stability. 2010. “Troubled Asset Relief Program: Two Year Retrospective.” 
US Department of the Treasury.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/troubled-asset-relief-program-two-year-retrospective-
united-states-department-treasury. 
Office of Public Affairs. 2013. “GM Timeline.” Department of the Treasury.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-treasury-department-office-public-affairs-gm-
timeline. 
Rattner, Steven. 2011. Overhaul: An Insider’s Account of the Obama Administration’s 
Emergency Rescue of the Auto Industry. Reprint Edition. Mariner Books.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/overhaul-insiders-account-obama-administrations-
emergency-rescue-auto-industry. 
Roland, Neil. 2009. “430 GM, Chrysler Suppliers Get Aid from Government,” July 13, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/430-gm-chrysler-suppliers-get-aid-government. 
276
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 24 ---
Sherefkin, Robert. 2010. “Treasury to End Auto -Supplier Loans.” Rubber & Plastics News , 
February 17, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-end-auto-supplier-loans. 
Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Pr ogram, Office of the ( SIGTARP). 
2009a. “Quarterly Report to Congress, April 21, 2009.” Office of the Special Inspector General 
for the Troubled Asset Relief Program.  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-
report-congress-april-21-2009. 
———. 2009b. “Quarterly Report to Congress, July 21, 2009.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-july-21-2009. 
———. 2010. “Quarterly Report to Congress July 21, 2010.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-july-21-2010. 
Treasury, US Department of the . 2009a. “Auto Supplier Support Program: Stabilizing the 
Auto Industry at a Time of Crisis.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3816. 
———. 2009b. “Treasury Announces Auto Supplier Support Program.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-announces-auto-supplier-support-program. 
———. n.d. “About TARP.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/about-tarp. 
V. Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
(MEMA 2009) Restoring Credit to Manufacturers   
Auto supplier trade group testimony to the US government. It contains a discussion of industry 
opinions on the ASSP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/testimony-motor-equipment-manufacturers-
association-senate-committee-banking-housing-and. 
(Treasury 2009a) Auto Supplier Support Program: Stabilizing the Auto Industry at a Time of 
Crisis  
Treasury’s brief description and announcement of the ASSP, includes notes on eligibility.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3816. 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(Chrysler and Treasury 2009a) Credit Agreement between Chrysler as Borrower and United 
States Department of the Treasury, as Lender  
Agreements (including amendments) to execute lending to Chrysler by Treasury  under the 
ASSP.   
277
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 25 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/credit-agreement-between-chrysler-borrower-and-
united-states-department-treasury-lender. 
(Chrysler and Treasury 2009b) Amended and Restated Credit Agreement between Chrysler 
as Borrower and United States Department of the Treasury  
Agreement funding the continuation of the ASSP for the post-bankruptcy Chrysler.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/amended-and-restated-credit-agreement-between-
chrysler-borrower-and-united-states. 
(GM Co. and Treasury 2009) Amended and Restated Credit Agreement  
Agreements (including amendments) to execute lending to General Motors by Treasury  under 
the ASSP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/amended-and-restated-credit-agreement-between-
general-motors-borrower-and-united-states. 
Press Releases/Announcements 
Auto Supplier Support Program, Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (CRFB)  
Expenditure report from the CRFB recording spending under the ASSP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/auto-supplier-support-program-assp-notification-
stimulusorg. 
Governor Granholm’s Statement on US Treasury’s Announcement that Ailing Auto Suppliers 
will receive $5 Billion  
Statement from the Governor of Michigan  praising the ASSP immediately after its 
announcement.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/governor-granholms-statement-us-
treasurys-announcement-ailing-auto-suppliers-will-receive-5. 
Letter to Ron Bloom and Steven Rattner, members of President Obama’s Auto Task Force  
Copy of letter sent by the members of the Michigan congressional delegation to Ron Bloom and 
Steven Rattner asking for a modification to the ASSP rules.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/letter-ron-bloom-and-steven-rattner-members-
president-obamas-auto-task-force. 
Resurgence of the American Automotive Industry  
Report making the case that the Obama  administration’s actions rescuing GM and Chrysler 
were successful.  
 https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/resurgence-american-automotive-industry. 
Secretary Paulson’s Statement on Stabilizing the Automotive Industry  
Treasury announcement of support for the auto industry using TARP; it contemplates that the 
process will be discussed with Congress and president-elect Obama’s transition team.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Secretary%20Paulson%20S
tatement%20on%20Stabilizing%20the%20Automotive%20Industry.pdf. 
278
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 26 ---
(Treasury 2009b) Treasury Announces Auto Supplier Support Program  
Statement outlining the goals and basic operations of the ASSP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-announces-auto-supplier-support-program. 
Media Stories 
(Bauer 2009) Suppliers can get in line for federal support administered by GM, Chrysler    
April 8, 2009, Grand Rapids Press newspaper article quoting Jenni Engebretsen of Treasury on 
the beginning of lending by OEMs under the ASSP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/suppliers-can-get-line-federal-support-administered-
gm-chrysler. 
(Beene 2009a) GM tells suppliers they’ll get paid even in bankruptcy  
Automotive News coverage of announcement by GM officials that parts suppliers will be paid 
during bankruptcy proceedings.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gm-tells-suppliers-theyll-get-paid-even-bankruptcy. 
(Beene 2009b) Federal supplier-support program launched today   
April 10, 2009, Crain’s Detroit Business article announcing the launch of the ASSP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/federal-supplier-support-program-launched-today. 
(Grossman 2009) Small Parts Suppliers Fight to Survive  
June 5, 2009, Wall Street Journal  reporting on the continued plight of small part suppliers. 
Contains details on criticisms of the ASSP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/small-parts-suppliers-fight-survive. 
(Hall 2009) Treasury throws $5 billion lifeline to auto supplier  
McClatchey New spapers article announcing the ASSP . It contains commentary from parts 
suppliers on their industry and how they perceive the ASSP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-throws-5-billion-lifeline-auto-suppliers. 
(Politico 2008) Parts Suppliers Submit Additional Assistance Request to Treasury  
Politico story discussing a proposal for the reallocation of funds under and modification of the 
ASSP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bush-announces-174-billion-auto-bailout. 
(Roland 2009) 430 GM, Chrysler Suppliers get aid from government  
Automotive News  article containing the first indication of participation by suppliers in the 
ASSP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/430-gm-chrysler-suppliers-get-aid-government. 
(Sherefkin 2010) Treasury to end auto-supplier loans    
Coverage of the announced conclusion of the ASSP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-end-auto-supplier-loans. 
(Watson 2009) Truckers Seen Benefiting from Auto Supplier Plan   
Article discussing the announcement of the ASSP and how it may bolster the trucking industry 
279
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 27 ---
by boosting certainty among truckers that haul auto parts.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/truckers-seen-benefiting-auto-supplier-plan. 
Reports/Assessments 
Chrysler Receivables SPV, LLC Bailout Tracker   
ProPublica website tracking spending related to Chrysler’s ASSP SPV.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Chrysler%20Receivables%
20SPV%20LLC%20_%20Eye%20on%20the%20Bailout%20_%20ProPublica.pdf. 
(COP 2009) September Oversight Report: The Use of TARP Funds in the Support and 
Reorganization of the Domestic Automotive Industry  
Congressional Oversight Panel report analyzing and providing recommendations related to the 
creation, implementation, and issues raised by the use of TARP funds in the automotive bailout. 
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/Congressional_Oversight_Pa
nel_September_2009_Report_20090909.pdf. 
(COP 2009b) Oversight of TARP Assistance to the Automobile Industry  
Statements by various stakeholders in the automotive restruct uring discussing the various  
constituent programs.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/oversight-tarp-assistance-automobile-industry-field-
hearing-congressional-oversight-panel. 
(Department of Commerce 2007) US Automotive Parts Industry Annual Assessment  
Department of Commerce report on the deteriorating financial condition of auto parts 
suppliers in the US and their connection to the three main domestic automakers.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-automotive-parts-industry-annual-assessment-
march-2007. 
(Department of Commerce 2008) US Automotive Parts Industry Annual Assessment  
Department of Commerce report on the dire condition of auto parts suppliers in the US and 
their connection to the three main domestic automakers.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-automotive-parts-industry-annual-assessment-
march-2008. 
GM Supplier Receivables, LLC Bailout Tracker   
ProPublica website tracking spending related to GM’s ASSP SPV.  
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/GM%20Supplier%20Receiv
ables,%20LLC%20_%20Eye%20on%20the%20Bailout%20_%20ProPublica.pdf. 
(Goolsbee and Kruger 2015)  A Retrospective Look at Rescuing and Restructuring General 
Motors and Chrysler  
Analysis of the government’s involvement in the auto sector by two economists involved in the 
Obama administration’s Council of Economic Advisors.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/retrospective-look-rescuing-and-
restructuring-general-motors-and-chrysler. 
280
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F Matsumoto

--- Page 28 ---
(Office of Financial Stability 2010) Troubled Asset Relief Program: Two Year Retrospective  
Report from Treasury’s Office of Financial Stability that contains a short evaluation of the ASSP 
after its conclusion.  
 https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/fcic-docs/2010-10-
10%20TARP%20Two%20Year%20Retrospective.pdf. 
(SIGTARP 2009a) Quarterly Report to Congress  
First quarter of 2009 report that contains summaries of the ASSP and records spending from 
all programs within TARP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-april-21-2009. 
(SIGTARP 2009b) Quarterly Report to Congress  
Second quarter of 2009 report that contains summaries of the ASSP and records spending from 
all programs within TARP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-july-21-2009. 
(SIGTARP 2010) Quarterly Report to Congress  
 Second quarter of 2010 report that contains summaries of the ASSP and records spending from 
all programs within TARP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-july-21-2010. 
 
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to 
receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program 
on Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
281
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1