--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Brian Stoker Lessons Learned: Brian Stoker 
Steven H. Kasoff 
Yale School of Management School of Management 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kasoff, Steven H. and Lieber, Matthew A. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Brian Stoker," Journal of Financial 
Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 438-441. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1275 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/19 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/19

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Brian Stoker 
By Steven H. Kasoff and Matthew A. Lieber 
Brian Stoker served in Merrill Lynch’s structured credit division for seven years, producing and 
trading asset-backed securities (ABS). In 2005, Stoker moved to Citigroup as a director of ABS 
CDO (collateralized debt obligation) and CLO (collateralized loan obligation) structuring. After 
the financial crisis, Stoker was an analyst at Carlson Capital for three years. In 2011, he joined 
StormHarbour Securities, serving as a managing director until 2018. From 2019 to 2021, he 
was director of securitization at Korth Direct Mortgage. Presently, Stoker is a licensed real 
estate agent in Miami. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview with Stoker. 
Block and tackle: To produce a CDO profitably, investment banks had structuring 
units that did the heavy l ifting: analyzing prospective deals, obtaining rating agency 
approval, engineering the security, and marketing the tranches to investors. 
Producing a CDO frequently began in response to an incoming call from a portfolio manager 
or from Merrill’s sales desk , related Stoker. Sometimes, the structuring unit was more 
proactive, reaching out to CDO managers to propose a deal. Then, crucially, the structuring 
group would “figure out whether the economics of the deal work[ed],” evaluating its 
expected liability spreads to determine if it would be profitable. 
Interacting with the rating agencies during the process “was mostly about following their 
rules.” Stoker pushed back somewhat against accounts of ratings shopping, pointing out that 
“both sides had veto rights on the deal.” 
We needed Moody’s and S&P on our deals, and if they gave us a bad rating, we were 
in a world of hurt. We needed to work with them. And they wanted to work with us 
because they get paid a big fee. 
“I don’t think we played off Moody’s versus S&P,” Stoker said. Fitch was trying to get into the 
CDO ratings market, so “we [w]ould start including them as long as they came up with ratings 
that matched up with the other rating agencies.” Most deals that he worked on had both large 
agencies involved: “ Moody’s would rate all the capital structure because they might have 
been a little easier than Standard & Poor’s down the capital structure.” 
The dealers were strategic, Stoker allowed, but in his account, the interactions with rating 
agencies were far more subtle than in other reports of ratings shopping. Crucially, the agency 
had leverage over the dealer too, and any differences between the ratings of one agency and 
another tended to be marginal. 
The dealers marketed the CDO tranches based on established investor preferences, Stoker 
explained. Banks were happy to hold the AAA tranche, often with monoline insurers 
providing additional protection (known as the negative basis trade). Insurance companies 
favored the single -A tranche, which National Association  of Insurance Commissioners 
438

--- Page 4 ---
(NAIC) rules allowed them to treat as they would a AAA security. Hedge funds pursuing 
higher returns would take the BBB tranche and equity. 
Seeking high profits, dealers migrated from just structuring CDOs for a fee to acquiring 
CDO tranches, accumulating risk that would come back to bite them. 
Stoker described a key incremental step that led dealers to take on risk as they grew their 
lucrative CDO structuring business. In the early days of CDO structuring at Merrill, he said, 
“we would sell the AAA to [five or 10] banks . . . . But then it became a competitive advantage 
for the dealer to buy some of the AAA [italics added].” 
Dealers viewed the move to hold on to AAA tranches as a way to increase the profitability of 
their CDO bus iness. Because dealers did not need to hold much capital against these AAA 
tranches, the inherent leverage was very high, resulting in a compelling return on capital. 
The risk was considered to be minimal, so many dealers accumulated massive quantities 
within one to two years. 
If it looks too good to be true, it probably is: Citigroup used its commercial paper 
business to create the appearance of “risk-free profits.” 
In the case of Citigroup, where Stoker moved in 2005, the firm used its commercial paper 
(CP) facilities to accumulate AAA CDO tranches. 
Citigroup could issue commercial paper . . . CP investors would put up all the money 
to buy that tranche, to buy the AAAs, but Citigroup essentially insured it. But that 
insurance did not show up on our balance sheet at all. 
Citigroup’s CP-funded asset warehousing “made an infinite percentage return as a percent 
of capital because there was no capital [usage].” Internal accounting procedures permitted 
the business unit to immediately book the next five years’ wo rth of expected profits, 
providing an even stronger incentive for the individual bankers in those groups. “We’d get 
paid in full for five years,” Stoker said. 
To grow the CP-funded asset accumulation, Citigroup created structured investment vehicles 
(SIVs), also known as asset -backed commercial paper (ABCP) conduits, Stoker explained. 
“Citigroup had humongous SIVs that Citigroup effectively backstopped also.” The boom -
fueled accumulation of assets was considered a low-risk or risk-free business. It spiked until 
it was noticed, and then Citigroup’s managers put on limits. 
When we got to $40 billion or $35 billion, somebody at the bank finally noticed and 
said, “Hey, that’s a lot.” They started to impose rules. 
The SIVs had not been consolidated as part of Citigroup’s balance sheet, Stoker said, but that 
changed in late 2007 or 2008. “I don’t think they were trying to hide it. I’m sure they were 
following the rules, but the rules allowed them to book it that way.” 
439
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
In 2006, Stoker recalled, investors’ debates about housing prices were intensifying. “I didn’t 
have to debate it,” he said,” because I was not buying or selling anything. I was just processing 
spreadsheets and papers.” By the end of the year, reports indicating a bad end to the housing 
boom were resonating on Wall Street. 
I came into the office after New Year’s in January 2007. I got sat down by the head of 
our trading desk and his boss, and they said, “Get all these deals done tomorrow, all 
of them.” We pushed real hard to get them done as fast as we c ould. We tried to do 
the riskiest ones first, but the losses were piling up fast. 
Throughout 2007, Stoker’s group at Citigroup struggled desperately to reduce the firm’s 
massive subprime exposure in its CDO warehouse. In March, Stoker recalled, his group 
marked one warehouse down $100 million —“and we hadn’t even marked down the whole 
portfolio.” Stunned by the losses, they complained to the trading desk. “‘What’s going on 
here?’ But it got real bad.” 
He recalled his alarm on hearing the firm’s then -CEO, Chu ck Prince, say later in the year 
about leveraged buyouts—“As long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance.” 
My reaction was, “I need to slip a note under his door and say, ‘You got to pay 
attention, dude. This is a big freaking problem.”’ 
Stoker’s astonishment reflected his reality as a midlevel employee in one of the world’s 
largest banks. For seven months, he and his group had been aware of Citi’s exposure to 
massive subprime losses and had been striving desperately to clean it up. “In Jul y, he was 
still dancing,” said Stoker. “And I was thinking, ‘Man, this is bad. We got $40 billion of the 
stuff with a commercial paper exposure.’” He was struck by the CEO’s seeming ignorance: 
These banks are so big. I was disappointed that the information  didn’t travel up to 
senior executives very well, nor was it connected. Nobody told the CDO desk or told 
Chuck Prince that, “Hey, by the way, these things are starting to go bad. You’re 
retaining a lot of the ‘super senior.’ You have a lot of exposure ther e. You have 
humongous warehouses.” 
Within giant financial organizations, circumstances can look very different from 
different perspectives. 
It is well accepted that the crisis tarnished Wall Street’s image in the public’s eye. The legacy 
is raft with stories of greedy bankers devising complex and faulty products that they then 
foisted on their clients. Stoker took issue with this sullied image, noting that there was logic 
to the appeal of securitization. He also defended employees like himself. In his perspective, 
from the midlevel working ranks, transparency and diligent compliance efforts were what 
stood out. 
In general, Wall Street has a bad name, but I thought everybody was up front. I didn’t 
see fraud or stealing going on. Everybody was first class, trying their best, and banks 
[were] spending billions to comply with every rule. There were no tricks, and nothing 
440
Lessons Learned: Brian Stoker Kasoff and Lieber

--- Page 6 ---
hidden . . . I thought the securitization market was transparent and a first-class place, 
actually. 
Stoker’s emphasis on transparency and r ule-driven behavior in the structured credit 
world—seemingly idealized at first glance —comes from his firsthand experience. When 
asked to address the troubling facts of mismanagement at leading Wall Street firms during 
the period, Stoker expressed disappointment at the lack of communication between different 
units and levels of the giant organizations and reflected on how his reality did not square 
with the CEO’s contemporaneous comments. 
“Cognitive dissonance,” he said, is a concept that he thinks describe s the crisis period well. 
Stoker saw cognitive dissonance in the incongruence of his experience with the widespread 
sense of a Wall Street driven by greed. “You hear something so many times in the press about 
how terrible Wall Street is,” Stoker explained. The stories make people think “that there was 
terrible stuff going on, but it was not true. I don’t think it was true at all.” 
But cognitive dissonance could just as well describe the rejection by senior executives and 
the CEOs of urgent new information from midlevel managers until it was too late. 
Stoker’s takeaways may be out of step with much of the post-crisis common lore and a good 
deal of the evidence on the record. It is also true that not much of that record comes from 
midlevel employees like him. Further, it is useful to remember that behind every nefarious 
story, there are often thousands of employees going about their jobs the best that they can 
and, even in the midst of a crisis, doing their best to follow the rules. 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: April 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021-02 
 
441
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1