--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
A Special Project: Inside the CDO Machine A Special Project: Inside the CDO Machine 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Wiggins, Rosalind Z. and Metrick, Andrew (2022) "A Special Project: Inside the CDO Machine," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 368-370. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1266 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/10 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/10

--- Page 3 ---
The YPFS Lessons Learned Oral History Project 
A Special Project: Inside the CDO Machine  
Rosalind Z. Wiggins* and Andrew Metrick†
In this issue of the Journal of Financial Crisis , we feature Inside the CDO Machine —a special 
undertaking recently completed under the auspices of the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability Lessons Learned Oral History Project by Steven H. Kasoff, a  Yale School of 
Management Fellow  and former equity partner and head of  real estate and struct ured 
products investments at the Elliott Management Corp., a global hedge fund. For the project, 
Kasoff undertook a series of interviews with industry professionals to focus on one of the 
critical derivatives products of the G lobal Financial Crisis (G FC), collateralized debt 
obligations (CDOs), and how they became so important to the events of the crisis. 
As the Inside the CDO Machine  project materials evidence, in the decade prior to the crisis, 
new complex products, including CDOs, were developed that took advantage of the mortgage 
boom and responded to the great investor demand for high -yield securities. “ABS CDOs 
became the main investment vehicle for the riskiest investment -grade securities in the 
private-label mortgage market.”1  
In its final report on the causes of the GFC, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC) 
found, among other things, that CDOs “turned out to be some of the most toxic assets during 
the crisis”2 and were key elements in spreading risk throughout the fi nancial system and in 
accelerating the crisis.3  
These CDOs —composed of the riskier tranches —fueled demand for nonprime 
mortgage securitization and contributed to the housing bubble . . . Many of these risky 
 
* Director, the Global Financial Crisis Project, Senior Editor, Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS), Yale 
School of Management, and Project Manager, the Lessons Learned Oral History Project, YPFS. 
† Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management, and YPFS Founder and Director, Yale School of 
Management. 
1 See Greg Feldberg, Larry Cordell, and Danielle Sass, “The Role of ABS CDOs in the Financial Crisis,” Journal of 
Structured Finance 25, no. 2 (Summer 2019): 10–27 [URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3443043].   
2 Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC). Website: Resource Library: CDO Library. 
http://fcic.som.yale.edu/resource/staff-data-projects/cdo-Library. 
3 FCIC, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the 
Financial and Economic Crisis in the United States (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 2011); 
see “Chapter 8: The CDO Machine” (127–55) and “Conclusions of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission” 
(xv–xxviii). 
368

--- Page 4 ---
assets ended up on the balance sheets of system ically important institutions and 
contributed to their failure or near failure in the financial crisis.4 
Scholars estimate that during the GFC, “write-downs on ABS CDOs [totaled] $410 billion . . . 
with $325 billion assumed by AAA and ‘super-senior’ securities, which had minimal capital, 
margin, or liquidity requirements. ”5 Under then-existing regulations, some firms investing 
in these securities were permitted to take on excessive leverage , “imperiling their solvency 
and placing them at the center of the financial crisis.”6 
As a former peer, Kasoff had unique access  to the Inside the CDO Machine project 
participants; could garner their confidence ; and underst ood their language, nuances, and 
anecdotes. This entrée allowed Kasoff, along with Matt Lieber, one of our Lessons Learned 
interviewers, to question at length six individuals in key roles in the CDO business as it 
evolved, exploring developments from inside the industry . In addition, Kasoff contributed 
his own extensive interview. 
Drawing upon his own experiences and these interviews, Kasoff has written a monograph, 
“Anatomy of a Trade: The Making of a Subprime CDO,” a detailed and insightful parable that 
illustrates the insiders’ points of view—the motives, structural maneuvering, and evolution 
of this pivotal market. The form also makes the complicated topic accessible for most readers 
and highlights the usefulness of the interviews as source material. This main work includes 
a glossary of key terms and is accompanied by a companion piece, “Wall Street’s Subprime 
Debacle: Firsthand Accounts from Inside the CDO Machine,” which provides details about the 
project and participants:  
Inside the CDO Machine 
• Wall Street’s Subprime Debacle: Firsthand Accounts from Inside the CDO Machine— 
by Matthew A. Lieber and Steven H. Kasoff 
• Anatomy of a Trade: The Making of a Subprime CDO 
by Steven H. Kasoff 
• Lessons Learned Interview Summaries 
o Steven H. Kasoff 
o James Finkel 
o Sohail Khan 
o Stephen King 
o Eric Kolchinsky 
o Chris Ricciardi 
o Brian Stoker 
 
 
4 FCIC 2011, 155.  
5 Cordell, Feldberg, and Sass 2019, 10. 
6 Cordell, Feldberg, and Sass 2019, 10. 
369
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
The full -length Inside the CDO Machine  project interviews are available on the Lessons 
Learned website. We urge you to explore them for their rich insights.  Also available on the 
website are dozens of other Lessons Learned interviews. 
The Lessons Learned Oral History Project grew out of the Yale Program on Financial Stability 
(YPFS), which began in 2013 with the mission to preserve, create , and share knowledge about 
financial crises and how regulators and policymakers prevent, diagnose, and combat these rare 
and unprecedented events. You may learn more about YPFS from our program website, and you 
may access our published cases in the Journal of Financial Crises. 
 
 
370
A Special Project: Inside the CDO Machine Wiggins and Metrick