--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Managing External Volatility: Policy Frameworks in Non-Reserve-Managing External Volatility: Policy Frameworks in Non-Reserve-
Issuing Economies Issuing Economies 
Hélène Poirson 
International Monetary Fund 
Nathan Porter 
International Monetary Fund 
Ghada Fayad 
International Monetary Fund 
Itai Agur 
International Monetary Fund 
Ran Bi 
International Monetary Fund 
See next page for additional authors Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Poirson, Hélène; Porter, Nathan; Fayad, Ghada; Agur, Itai; Bi, Ran; Chen, Jiaqian; Eugster, Johannes; 
Laseen, Stefan; Menkulasi, Jeta; Moriyama, Kenji; Rochon, Céline; Svirydzenka, Katsiaryna; Tovar, Camilo; 
Zhang, Zhongxia; and Zdzienicka, Aleksandra (2022) "Managing External Volatility: Policy Frameworks in 
Non-Reserve-Issuing Economies," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 60-98. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1420 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/2 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
Managing External Volatility: Policy Frameworks in Non-Reserve-Issuing Managing External Volatility: Policy Frameworks in Non-Reserve-Issuing 
Economies Economies 
Authors Authors 
Hélène Poirson, Nathan Porter, Ghada Fayad, Itai Agur, Ran Bi, Jiaqian Chen, Johannes Eugster, Stefan 
Laseen, Jeta Menkulasi, Kenji Moriyama, Céline Rochon, Katsiaryna Svirydzenka, Camilo Tovar, Zhongxia 
Zhang, and Aleksandra Zdzienicka 
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote 
The authors would like to thank Marco Arena, Vivek Arora, Gabriel Di Bella, Rupa Duttagupta, Gaston 
Gelos, Lucyna Gornicka, Vikram Haksar, Armine Khachatryan, Vladimir Klyuev, Petya Koeva Brooks, Martin 
Kaufman, Varapat Chensavasdijai, Gavin Gray, Shakill Hassan, Dong He, Jonathan Ostry, Mahvash 
Qureshi, and Yu Shi as well as the Bank of Israel, Bank of Mexico, and Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas for 
valuable comments, and Arshia Karki, Chengyu Huang, Tessy Vasquez, and Tiffany Wang for outstanding 
research assistance. This work was created while all authors were working at the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF). The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, or IMF management. For those authors who are currently 
employed by other institutions, the same disclaimer applies for their current institutional affiliations. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol4/iss3/2

--- Page 3 ---
Managing External Volatility: Policy Frameworks 
in Non-Reserve-Issuing Economies1 
Hélène Poirson, Nathan Porter, Ghada Fayad, Itai Agur, Ran Bi, Jiaqian Chen,   
Johannes Eugster, Stefan Laseen, Jeta Menkulasi, Kenji Moriyama, Céline Rochon,  
Katsiaryna Svirydzenka, Camilo Tovar, Zhongxia Zhang, and Aleksandra Zdzienicka2 
Abstract 
Since the Global Financial Crisis, non-reserve-issuing economies (NREs) have been highly 
sensitive to episodes of external pressures. With monetary policy independence constrained 
by this sensitivity, many NREs have utilized other policy instruments. This paper confirms 
the vulnerability of NREs to external shocks and finds that, in some circumstances, managing 
such shocks with multip le instruments can both lessen the policy response required from 
any one policy tool to financial and external shocks and increase the effectiveness of policies 
in stabilizing macrofinancial conditions. Effectiveness , however, does not always imply 
appropriateness, which rests on an evaluation of potential trade -offs and unintended 
consequences. 
 
Keywords: capital flow management measures, foreign exchange intervention, 
macroprudential policy, monetary policy, policy transmission and effectiveness 
 
JEL Classifications: E44, E52, E58, F31, F32, F62 
  
 
1 The authors would like to thank Marco Arena, Vivek Arora, Gabriel Di Bella, Rupa Duttagupta, Gaston Gelos, 
Lucyna Gornicka, Vikram Haksar, Armine Khachatryan, Vladimir Klyuev, Petya Koeva Brooks, Martin Kaufman, 
Varapat Chensavasdijai, Gavin Gray, Shakill Hassan, Dong He, Jonath an Ostry, Mahvash Qureshi, and Yu Shi as 
well as the Bank of Israel, Bank of Mexico, and Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas for valuable comments, and Arshia 
Karki, Chengyu Huang, Tessy Vasquez, and Tiffany Wang for outstanding research assistance. This work was 
created while all authors were working at the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The views expressed in this 
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, or 
IMF management. For those authors who  are currently employed by other institutions, the same disclaimer 
applies for their current institutional affiliations. 
2 Authors’ email addresses: Hélène Poirson (IMF; HPoirson@imf.org), Nathan Porter (IMF; NPorter@imf.org), 
Ghada Fayad (IMF; GFayad@imf.org); Itai Agur (IMF; IAgur@imf.org); Ran Bi (IMF; RBi@imf.org); Jiaqian Chen 
(IMF; JChen@imf.org); Johannes Eugster  (IMF and Swiss National Bank ; JEugster@imf.org), Stefan Laseen  
(Sveriges Riksbank (at IMF at time of writing) ; Stefan.Laseen@riksbank.se), Jeta Menkulasi  (IMF; 
JMenkulasi@imf.org), Kenji Moriyama  (IMF; KMoriyama@imf.org), Céline Rochon  (IMF; CRochon@imf.org), 
Katsiaryna Svirydzenka (IMF; KSvirydzenka@imf.org), Camilo Tovar (IMF; CTovar@imf.org), Zhongxia Zhang 
(IMF; ZZhang2@imf.org), and Aleksandra Zdzienicka (IMF; AZdzienicka@imf.org). 
 
60

--- Page 4 ---
I. Background 
Following on the experiences of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) set up a Working Group on “Integrated Policy Frameworks.” This group has been 
tasked with considering holistic ways of employing sets of policy tools, including monetary , 
macroprudential, exchange rate, and capital flow management policies, to mitigate financial 
crises. This paper summarizes some of the research done within this workstream since the 
GFC.3 Although the work shown here was conducted before the COVID -19 pandemic, the 
relevance of using multiple tools to navigate a challenging economic and financial 
environment has once again come to the fore during the past few years.  
II. Introduction 
While globalization has produced many benefits, the accompanying size and volatility of 
capital flows have also posed policy challenges for small, financially integrated, non-reserve-
issuing economies (NREs).4 The Global Financial Crisis led systemic economies to undertake 
unprecedented measures to support the recovery , which produced abrupt swings in risk 
sentiment, volatility in financing conditions, and large movements in capital flows. As such, the 
post-GFC period saw intervals of pressure on NREs affecting local financing conditions and 
exchange rates through volatile capital flows and spreads, raising concerns about economic 
and financial stability.5 Indeed, this period demonstrated how external financial conditions can 
complicate policymaking in NREs.  
Using a sample that covers both the pre-GFC period and its immediate aftermath, this paper 
confirms NREs’ vulnerability to spillovers (Section III). In line with the extensive literature 
on global spillovers from large economies ( for example, Rey 2015 or Arregui et al. 2018), 
analytical work in this paper confirms that NREs are heavily affected by both real and 
financial external conditions, which can affect policy independence and hamper policy 
settings in these countries.6 This paper considers the impact of changes in external financial 
conditions on policy independence in two different ways: first, the effect on the policy rate 
chosen by policymakers; and, second, the direct impact on domestic financial conditions 
(irrespective of policy rate changes). 
 
3 Other IMF work in this field is cited later in this section. 
4 Here, “reserve currency issuers” refers to issuers of the major reserve currencies (euro, pound, US dollar, and 
yen). Other countries that issue a reserve currency held in relatively small quantities by governments and 
institutions as part of their foreign reserves are considered NREs. 
5 By definition, NRE central banks do not have a function of lender of last resort of f oreign exchange (FX) 
liquidity. However, this paper’s view is that such a function would not be critical during nonstress periods. For 
the importance of the FX lender-of-last-resort function in NREs during severe stress periods, see discussion in 
IMF (2013a).  
6  Monetary policy independence is understood as the ability of NRE central banks to set interest rates 
independently of internationally prevailing rates (Aizenman, Chinn, and Ito 2013).  
61
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Among NREs, both advanced economies (AEs) and emerging markets (EMs) have revised 
their policy frameworks over the past decade or so. EMs have continued their transition 
toward inflation targeting (IT) as a key monetary polic y objective, moving away from 
monetary and exchange rate targets. Both advanced economies and emerging markets have 
also made greater use of macroprudential measures (MPMs) to limit the buildup of systemic 
financial risks. Some EMs have also increased their use of capital flow management measures 
(CFMs).  
Given NRE policymakers’ increasing use of policy combinations to manage external volatility, 
this paper considers two important questions: (1) what are the conditions under which 
particular policy combinations may be most effective; and (2) what weight should be placed 
on each instrument to make a combination most effective? This paper provides some 
elements of a response to these questions, suggesting the need for further policy research 
(including at the country level). In this paper, effectiveness refers to the extent to which 
various policy tools and combinations can help dampen volatility in growth and inflation. 
This, in turn, is based on how key macroeconomic aggregates and financial prices (mainly 
interest and exchange rates) respond to the use of these instruments. Effectiveness is thus 
intertwined with the transmission channels of macroeconomic and other policies, and any 
potential interactions between these policies. Effectiveness, however, does no t imply 
appropriateness.7 Other factors—including initial conditions, the stage of the financial cycle, 
macroeconomic policy imbalances, the costs of activating a particular tool as well as any 
possible unintended consequences that may result from the pro longed use of such tools —
also matter for the appropriateness of a particular policy choice.  
The paper’s key messages relate to the transmission and effectiveness of instruments and 
different policy combinations: 
• NREs’ vulnerability to spillovers. In a sample of 11 major EMs selected to provide broad 
coverage across regions, domestic policy rates react directly to both external financial 
conditions and external real factors. There is also a high sensitivity of domestic yields 
and exchange rates to external financial shocks irrespective of changes in domestic 
policy rates. Both these findings suggest a loss of monetary policy independence. 
Spillover analysis using a large sample of 66 NREs confirms their vulnerability to 
global financial shocks. However, NREs with a more flexible exchange rate regime, 
and those that deploy alternative, more targeted instruments, seem to regain some 
monetary policy autonomy. 
• Transmission and effectiveness of policy instruments . In the sampl e of 11 major EMs, 
interest rate –based monetary policy can effectively influence both output and 
inflation and transmits through long -term interest rates. Exchange rate flexibility 
plays a critical role as a buffer for NREs, although foreign exchange intervention (FXI) 
seems capable of mitigating appreciation and depreciation pressures at most in the 
 
7 A determination of appropriateness is outside the scope of thi s paper as it requires a fuller analysis of costs 
and benefits of the different policy combinations. See Basu et al.  (2020) and Adrian et al.  (2020) on the 
assessment of optimal policy combinations in response to external shocks.   
62
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 6 ---
short run, given the significant impact on the pace of foreign exchange (FX), when 
reserves are adequate and macroeconomic imbalances small. The impact of FXI is 
comparatively larger for countries with CFMs as this reduces offsetting private capital 
flows. During periods of high external pressure, however, interest rate policy can be 
helpful. The results of panel regression analysis for a large sample of 79 NREs indicate 
that, reflecting the importance of the exchange rate and credit channels, NRE central 
banks tend to de facto  respond to financial and external stability considerations. 
However, the use of alternate instruments targeted specifically at these objectives 
seems to limit the need for them to use monetary policy for these considerations. 
• Effectiveness of policy packa ges. There are important interactions between policy 
instruments that affect the impact of an overall policy package. These depend on the 
nature of the shock and the constraints on monetary policy transmission. In the case 
of the lower bound constraint on monetary policy, the results of a novel open -
economy dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model  illustrate that a combined 
policy response to a global supply shock that lowers inflation can be more effective 
than a response that relies on a single instrument.  
These initial findings lay down some markers for further policy research on Integrated Policy 
Frameworks. Policy and analytical work on these issues has progressed at a rapid clip in 
recent years, including under the IMF ’s Integrated Policy Frameworks umbrella. Basu et al. 
(2020) provide s a comprehensive model that jointly analyzes monetary, exchange rate, 
macroprudential, and capital flow management policies and analytically solves for the 
authors’ optimal combination, including how these policies i nteract with different frictions 
and with each other. Adrian et al. (2020) uses an empirically oriented model to quantify the 
policy trade-offs countries face and how different policy tools can be used to mitigate them. 
Fayad and Poirson (2020) use s a case  study approach to assess the unorthodox policy 
responses to external shocks of seven small open economies with flexible exchange rate 
regimes. For EMs in Asia, Finger and Lopez Murphy (2019) finds that, in addition to inflation 
and output gaps, monetary policy responds to an array of external and domestic influences, 
including the US policy rate, capital flows, the exchange rate, and credit growth. Gelos et al. 
(2019) empirically show s for EMs in general that monetary policy may not always be 
effective in addressing external shocks. Brandao -Marques et al. (2020) find s that macro  
policies are effective in “leaning against” financial vulnerabilities and are best accompanied 
by looser, not tighter, monetary policy.  
This paper is structured as follows. Section III establishes the sensitivity of NREs to external 
conditions by estimating the effect s of external real and financial shocks on key 
macroeconomic variables and on the policy rate. S ection IV discusses the evolving use of 
alternative policy tools by NREs ( IV.A) and illustrates how such use is able to help manage 
macroeconomic developments, including by investigating the transmission and 
effectiveness of traditional monetary policy and  how the use of alternate tools affects FXI 
effectiveness and the monetary policy reaction (IV.B). It also outlines the example of Russia, 
where interest rate policy was an effective part of the policy package to stem extreme 
external pressure in 2014 –2015 (IV.C) and illustrates the impact and effectiveness of 
63
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
alternative policy responses (IV.D). Section V concludes. Appendixes are found at the end of 
this paper. 
III. Spillovers from External Conditions 
NREs are highly sensitive to changing external demand and f inancial conditions, even 
outside systemic risk -off events. This sensitivity can constrain their monetary policy 
independence. This could call for the need to deploy other policy tools to assist in achieving 
domestic policy objectives. 
To show this sensiti vity, the paper applies a pooled panel structural vector autoregression 
(VAR), using monthly data from 11 EMs.8 The model includes factors summarizing external 
real and financial conditions, growth, inflation, the nominal effective exchange rate (NEER), 
the policy rate and long -term interest rates, and domestic credit. In this exercise, external 
conditions are captured by: (1) financial factors (namely, country-specific Emerging Market 
Bond Index [EMBI] and credit default swap [CDS]  spreads, US term premia,  and the CBOE 
Volatility Index [VIX]) and (2) real factors (namely, external demand, terms of trade, and 
relevant commodity prices). The model is estimated using six lags and a Cholesky 
identification, which orders external factors before domestic activity, prices, and credit. 
Exchange rates and interest rates are ordered last. The latter variables react 
contemporaneously to all previous ones, but they affect only those with a lag. Specifically, 
the baseline ordering is the following: external financial conditions, external real conditions, 
domestic activity, Consumer Price Index ( CPI) inflation, private credit grow th, the policy 
rate, long-run yields, and the NEER. The results are robust to different orderings.9 
The variance decomposition , shown in Figure 1,  suggests that real and financial external 
shocks are the largest individual drivers of volatility in small f inancially integrated NREs. 
External financial conditions contribute the most to movements in domestic yields and the 
exchange rate, and thus these spillovers constrain the monetary policy independence 
enjoyed by NREs.10 On the other hand, external real factors are the most important for other 
variables. The importance of these factors is also confirmed in their effect on the dynamics 
 
8 The sample used for the analysis in this section includes Brazil, Chile, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, 
Poland, Thailand, Turkey, and South Africa, providing coverage of major emerging markets across regions, with 
roughly similar levels of development and reliance on  interest rates for monetary policy (despite varying 
degrees of intervention). It also reflects data availability constraints—related to data underpinning the external 
factors—for some other economies. The sample period is 2000–2016. 
9 The results in this section from the pooled VAR are based on the average reactions across the countries in the 
sample, and thus mask the cross-country variation in the duration and the amplitude of the impacts of shocks. 
A country -specific analysis, not s hown here, reveal s that although the impulse responses from the panel 
generally represent the reaction of a clear majority of the countries, there are often a few exceptions. Aggregate 
results should be interpreted with theses country differences in mind.  
10 The findings are in line with Chapter 3  of the April 2017 IMF Global Financial Stability Report (IMF 2017). 
Sensitivity to external spillovers could imply limits to monetary policy independence, to the extent that it 
constrains domestic policy’s ability to respond optimally to foreign financial conditions. 
64
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 8 ---
of key macroeconomic variables and financial prices (Figure 2). A strengthening of real 
external conditions , on the one hand , raises domestic activity and inflation, lead ing to an 
appreciation of the currency. Tighter external financial conditions , on the other hand, 
depreciate the exchange rate, which temporarily translates into inflationary pressures 
despite a protracted negative effect on domestic activity. 
Figure 1: Decomposing the drivers of volatility 
 
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics. 
Exchange rates act as an important buffer against external shocks in many NREs. Positive 
real external shocks, such as shocks to commodity prices or external demand, lead to a 
nominal appreciation of the domestic currency, while external financial shocks associated 
with tighter global financial conditions lead to currency deprec iation (Figure 3). Exchange 
rate flexibility thus moderates the impact of real and financial shocks.  
The concept of monetary policy independence discussed so far relates to the impact of 
changing external real and financial conditions on domestic financial conditions irrespective 
of policy rate changes. There is another different, but related, way to consider independence. 
This second concept of independence relates to the impact of changes in external conditions 
on the policy rates policymakers choose.11 Here, the impact depends on the nature of the 
external shock, as well as on the extent to which other tools ( for example, CFMs and MPMs) 
are used to reduce the sensitivity of domestic conditions to external conditions. 
The impulse responses derived from th e estimated VAR models illustrate the dynamic 
responses of the policy rate to domestic and external shocks. In line with large AEs, own 
inflation and output are important drivers of the policy rate in NREs. However, exchange 
rates, credit, and external rea l and financial factors also have a statistically significant 
influence on the policy rate. While the specific results vary across countries, spillovers vary 
based on the nature of the shock and can be channeled either through exchange rate s or 
credit channels (Figure 4). Firstly, central banks’ policy rates respond to external conditions 
 
11 Policy rates in NREs are affected by external factors, not just by domestic inflation and output as in larger 
advanced economies. That is, the de facto policy rule includes factors beyond those in the standard Taylor rule 
(Käfer 2014). 
65
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
(Figures 5 and 6), with positive real external shocks and tighter external financial conditions 
leading to higher domestic policy rates. 12 The impact of overall financial external shocks 
(that is , those encompassed in the external factor) is, however , shorter-lived. The initial 
increase, possibly to stem capital outflows, peaks at about  six months, given a more 
persistent positive effect on long -term yields (Figure 7) and the significant contractionary 
effect on domestic activity (Figure 2). 
Figure 2: External Factors, Growth, and Inflation 
  
  
Notes: The impulse response function (IRF) shows reactions to one-standard-deviation shocks, and dotted lines 
show the 95% confidence intervals, in percentage terms, for the 11 EMs in our sample. The x -axis represents 
the 24-month horizon over which the effect of the shock is analyzed.  
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics . 
 
 
12 Although factor loadings differ somewhat among countries, a one -standard-deviation shock corresponds 
roughly to a two-standard-deviation change in the EMBI (equivalent to roughly 250 basis points  [bps]) or the 
five-year CDS spread (equivalent to roughly 265 bps) or a three -standard-deviation (20-unit) change in the 
VIX. 
66
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 3: External Factors and the NEER 
  
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics . 
  
67
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 4: The Drivers of the Policy Rate  
  
  
  
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics . 
 
68
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 5: External Financial Conditions and the Policy Rate 
  
  
  
Notes: The y-axis shows the impact of a 1 percentage point shock to US monetary policy rates or change in 
shocks to VIX on the level of the domestic policy rate , depending on the exchange rate and monetary policy 
regimes in a sample of 66 NREs. The x-axis indicates the number of quarters after the  shock in t=0. The dotted 
lines indicate the 90 % confidence interval. The VIX shocks are estimated using a VAR model with changes in 
US monetary policy rates and global oil prices used to capture the impact of global real shocks. For countries 
with more flexible exchange rate regimes, the response of monetary policy to VIX shocks become statistically 
significant seven quarters after the shock. For countries with fixed exchange rates, the impact of VIX shocks on 
policy rates is statistically significant for all quarters. 
Sources: FRED; IMF International Financial Statistics; Wu and Xia 2016. 
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Reaction of NRE policy rates to U.S. monetary policy shocks 
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Reaction to U.S. policy shocks in countries with fixed exchange 
rate regimes
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Reaction to U.S. policy shocks in countries with intermediate exchange 
rate regimes
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Reaction to U.S. policy shocks in countries with inflation targeting  
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Reaction of NRE monetary policy rates to VIX shocks 
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Reaction of NRE monetary policy rates to VIX shocks depending on 
exchange rate regrimes 
All countries
in countries with flexible exchange rate regimes (significant after 7 quarters)
in countries with fixed exchange rate regimes
69
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 6: The Response of Policy Rates to the Federal Funds Rate and Other Policy 
Tools 
  
Notes: The y-axis shows the impact of a 1 percentage point shock to US monetary policy rates on the level of 
the domestic policy rate based on an average change in MPMs, CFMs, and FXIs across countries and over time. 
The shaded area indicates the 90% confidence interval for baseline estimates. * indicates the quarters in which 
the effect statistically significantly varies with other policy tools. For instance, an average change in the CFM 
index (that is, sample mean across countries and over time) at the time of the shock (t=0) results in a lower 
reaction of the domestic polic y rates to the US monetary shocks in the first three quarters of the shocks 
compared to the reaction of policy rates without CFMs.  
Sources: Cerruti, Claessens, and Laeven 2015; Fernández et al. 2015; FRED; IMF International Financial Statistics; 
Wu and Xia 2016. The exchange rate regimes are classified based on the Reinhart -Rogoff classification into three 
groups: fixed, intermediate, and flexible. Dataset from Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff 2019. 
Figure 7: External Conditions and Long-Term Financial Conditions 
  
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics . 
Secondly, an effective appreciation of exchange rates  leads to a significant and persistent 
reduction of the policy rate, reflecting lower expected inflationary pressures.  
Rapid private credit growth can result in a tightening of interest rate policy over time to avoid 
economic overheating or balance sheet strains. We then analyze the role of other policy 
measures in shaping the monetary policy response of NREs to global financial shocks. Using 
the local projection method developed by Jord à (2005), we first estimate the average 
dynamic response of monetary policy rates to external financial conditions in a large sample 
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0 1* 2* 3* 4 5 6 7 8
Reaction of monetary policy rates depending on CFMs
All countries
Inlfation targeting with CFMs
Intermediate Exchange Rate Regimes with CFMs
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
0 1 2 3* 4* 5* 6* 7* 8*
Reaction of monetary policy rates depending on MPMs
All countries
Inflation targeting with MPMs
Intermediate Exchange Rate Regimes with MPMs
70
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 14 ---
of 66 NREs during the period Q1 1996 to Q4 2015. In particular, we estimate the average 
dynamic response of monetary policy rate y in country i to global financial shocks GFS for 
each future period k (=1,…,8): 
𝑦𝑖,𝑡+𝑘 − 𝑦𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖
𝑘 + 𝜗𝑡
𝑘 +  𝛽𝑘𝐺𝐹𝑆𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡
𝑘  (1) 
where 𝛼𝑖
𝑘  are country -fixed effects included to control for unobserved cross -country 
heterogeneity, 𝜗𝑡are time -fixed effects to control for other global shocks , and 𝜀𝑖,𝑡
𝑘  are the 
error terms.13 𝐺𝐹𝑆𝑡 are approximated by: ( 1) the federal funds rate and ( 2) the VIX. The 
estimates are based on clustered robust standard errors. 
Subsequently, we estimate Equation (1) controlling for country -specific factors and for 
exchange rate and monetary policy regimes. In particular, the exchange rate regimes are 
classified into three groups: fixed, intermediate, and flexible. 14 Members of monetary and 
currency unions, and countries without separated currency tenders, are excluded. Countries 
with inflation targeting are identified based on their central banks ’ information and IMF 
exchange rate arrangement classification. Finally, we extend Equation (1) to measure the 
impact of additional policies ( 𝑝𝑖𝑡) in shaping monetary policy  reaction to foreign financial 
shocks: 
𝑦𝑖,𝑡+𝑘 − 𝑦𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖
𝑘 + 𝜗𝑡
𝑘 +  𝛽𝑘𝐺𝐹𝑆𝑡 + 𝛿𝑘 𝐺𝐹𝑆𝑡𝑝𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑖
𝑘𝑝𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡
𝑘  (2) 
The results confirm that NREs’ policy rates react directly to Fed eral Reserve  policy rate 
changes, with increases in the US policy rate raising domestic policy rates (Figure 5). The speed 
of this response differs depending on country -specific factors and policy frameworks, 
including financial development, openness, and exchange rate regimes (in line with past 
studies of policy independence such as IMF (2013b), Ricci and Shi (2016), and Zdzienicka et 
al. (2015). In particular, policy rates in countries with a fixed exchange rate regime react 
immediately to such shocks, while the impact is delayed for NREs with a more flexible exchange 
rate regime—it becomes statistically significant only after two quarters for IT countries with 
a floating exchange rate regime and after four quarters for countries with intermediate 
exchange rate regimes. An increase in the VIX meanwhile —which directly tightens EM 
financing conditions through the risk premia—leads to a reduction in NRE policy rates.  
The results of this analysis also suggest that the response of monetary policy is softened  for 
countries using other policy tools  (Figure 6).15 For instance, the use of MPMs and CFMs for 
various objectives (including to safeguard systemic financial stability) seems, as a side effect, 
to dampen the reaction of monetary policy in countries with a more flexible exchange rate 
regime. This finding is unsurprising given that these policy tools seek to reduce th e 
 
13 Exchange rate regime classification follows Ilzetzki, Reinhart , and Rogoff (2019) . Results—available upon 
request—are robust to different lags, different measures of global financial conditions ( for example , US 
financial cycles [IMF 2015]), and additional controls (for example, financial crises, recessions).  
14 Dataset retrieved from https://carmenreinhart.com/exchange-rate/.  
15 Zdzienicka et. al. (2015).  
71
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
sensitivity of domestic economic and financial conditions to external shocks. Notably, the 
impact of CFMs is significant only in the short run (first three quarters) while that of MPMs 
is generally less significant but longer lasting. 
Last, beyond the im pact on the policy rate, changes in external conditions (especially 
financial conditions) significantly affect domestic financial conditions directly (Figure 6). 
Stronger real and tighter financial external conditions significantly raise longer -term bond 
yields. This impact is independent of changes in the policy rate, and hence suggests a loss of 
monetary policy independence. 
In sum, external conditions are important for economic and financial developments in NREs, 
and they constrain policy independence. There are several reasons for this. First, NRE central 
banks face more pressures on exchange rates through volatile capital f lows than reserve 
issuers. Second, NREs face significant pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to inflation, 
although to varying degrees depending on the extent of the credibility of the central bank. 
Third, some NREs are subject to large FX balance s heet mismatches. These factors create 
trade-offs for central banks beyond the standard trade -off between output and inflation 
summarized by the Phillips curve, further complicating monetary policymaking. 
IV. Effectiveness of Policy Combinations 
This section focuses on how the use of various policy tools can help manage macroeconomic 
developments. Specifically, it discusses ( 1) the evolving use of alternative policy tools by 
NREs; ( 2) the transmission of shocks and policies to the domestic economy and how the 
monetary reaction varies depending on the combination of instruments used; and ( 3) the 
effectiveness of policy combinations in addressing the impact of these shocks. Key findings 
are that despite some loss of independence, monetary policy remains an effective policy tool, 
in part by affecting long -term interest rates, and that the impact of policy combinations 
depends on the nature of the shock, the strength of the transmission channel, and policy 
constraints.16 
When confronted by external shocks —whether id iosyncratic or systemic —policymakers 
can choose from a variety of tools. The traditional tools —interest and exchange rates —
relate directly to the country’s monetary settings. As confirmed by the findings in Section III, 
allowing exchange rate flexibility can allow a country to maintain independent control over 
its domestic interest rate. Such independence is lost if the exchange rate is fixed or stabilized 
through intervention in a setting where capital flows relatively freely. However, other tools 
have been increasingly used in recent years, as discussed below. 
 
 
16 This is in line with the findings for ASEAN-5 countries in IMF (2016b). 
72
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 16 ---
A. The Use of Additional Instruments 
In addition to their reliance on macroeconomic policy, policymakers have made use of 
additional instruments to help manage rising financial sector stability risks. Increased use of 
CFMs in conjunction with other policies, for example, formed an important part of the 
response to the 2009 –2012 capital inflow surge  in EMs. Some countries affected by crises 
also have found CFMs on outflows a helpful tool. Many countries have also made use of 
MPMs, especially measures designed to limit financial stability risks arising from housing 
market developments ( for example , loan -to-value and debt -to-income ratios). MPMs are 
designed to limit systemic risks, including risks arising from procyclicality in financial 
markets. Depending on the tool used, the type of variable targeted, and the state of the 
financial cycle, MPMs can have significant mitigating effects on credit developments; 
however, empirical evidence on which policies ar e most effective in reducing the growth 
rates of overall credit and household and corporate sector credit is still elusive.17  
The pace of net reserve accumulation slowed in many regions during 2009 –2015. This 
slowing reflects the increased use of reserves to manage outflow episodes. However, 
although there has been increased two -sided intervention since the GFC, not all countries 
have felt free to use intervention in response to external pressures.  
Additional policy tools, including CFMs, MPMs, and intervention, have generally played a 
complementary role to macroeconomic policies, especially during tightening episodes  
(Figure 8). Simple correlation analysis indicates that monetary policy, CFMs (on both inflows 
and outflows), and FXI have be en used in complementary ways, while the interactions 
between monetary policy and MPMs have varied with the stance of monetary policy  (IMF 
2015; IMF 2016a). In particular, during a tightening phase, MPMs and monetary policy tend 
to work in tandem (compleme nts), whereas when monetary policy eases, MPMs tend to be 
tightened (substitutes). Some complementarity (joint tightening and joint easing) also seems 
to exist among FXIs, MPMs, and CFMs.18 
 
17 See, for instance, Akinci and Olmstead -Rumsey (2018) ; Cerutti, Claessens, and Laeven (2015);  Galati and 
Moessner (2013); and Lim et al. (2011).   
18 Similar pairwise corre lations for Asian countries in Bruno, Shim, and Shin (2017) suggest that monetary 
policy, macroprudential policy, and capital flow measures are all complements ( that is , jointly tightened or 
eased). Akinci and Olmstead -Rumsey (2018) differentiate s housing and nonhousing macroprudential tools, 
finding that the nonhousing measures work in tandem with monetary policy (complements), while the housing 
measures are tightened when monetary policy is eased, and vice versa (substitutes). 
73
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 8: Policy combinations 
 
Note: * indicates significance at 10%. 
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Cerutti, Claessens, and Laeven 2015; Fernández et al. 2015; and IMF International 
Financial Statistics. 
B. Monetary Policy Transmission and the Impact of Additional Instruments on FXI 
Effectiveness and the Monetary Policy Response 
This section investigates the transmission and effectiveness of traditional monetary policy 
and how the use of alternate tools affects FXI effectiveness and the monetary policy reaction. 
Policy rate changes aff ect output, in part by affecting longer -term interest rates (Figure 7). 
Inflation is highly responsive to output, and this Phillips curve relationship would thus seem 
an important part of the transmission process. Nonetheless, the direct impact of policy rates 
on inflation seems to be limited, reflecting a persistent “price puzzle, ” 19 consistent with 
findings in the literature. 
Changes in the nominal effective exchange rate significantly affect both growth and inflation, 
although the impact is affected by s tructural characteristics (Figure 9). Despite the easing 
effect on monetary policy, nominal exchange rate appreciation feeds through to lower 
inflation (in line with past studies on FX pass-through, such as Caselli and Roitman 2019, and 
Frankel, Parsley, and Wei 2012).20 However, pass-through depends heavily on the structural 
and institutional characteristics of the country, including the credibility of the central bank , 
which can limit second-round effects (Caselli and Roitman 2019).  
With the exchange rate having potent effects on growth and inflation, it has been an 
important tool for managing volatility in many NREs. Despite the move toward interest rate–
based monetary policy, FXI —both spot and nonspot —has proven effective at managing 
temporary external pressures and their inflationary consequences  (Figure 10) . The 
literature provides a mixed picture on the effectiveness of spot FX intervention. Ostry, Ghosh, 
 
19  A persistent “price puzzle”—the finding that positive interest rate shocks result in higher inflation in impulse 
response analysis —has been a common feature of many monetary policy VARs, for both advanced and 
emerging economies since Sims (1992). For advanced economies, alternative identifications (Kim and Roubini 
2000) and the inclusion of additional information ( for example,  Banbura, Giannone, and Reichlin 2010; and 
Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz 2005) have attenuated or even eliminated the puzzle. For EMs, however, none of 
the strategies has so far succeeded in eliminating the puzzle.  
20 The domestic activity response to a nominal depreciation likely reflects that appreciation is often associated 
with expanding external demand for domestic goods. 
Policies MP tightening MP easing MPMs CFMs FXIs
MP tightening 1.000
MP easing 1.000
MPMs 0.084* -0.096* 1.000
CFMs 0.156* -0.038 0.249* 1.000
FXIs 0.069* -0.058 0.017 0.087 1.000
74
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 18 ---
and Chamon (2012) concludes that evidence for the effectiveness of sterilized FXI in EMs is 
mixed but is generally more favorable than in the advanced economy context.  Adler and 
Tovar (2011) finds that purchasing foreign currency slowed the pace of appreciation and is 
more effective at slowing appreciation when the exchange rate is already  overvalued, with 
the amount of intervention appearing to matter more than the mere presence of the central 
bank in the FX market. 
Figure 9: The Effect of a Monetary Policy Shock 
  
  
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics. 
75
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 10: IRF of Output and Inflation to Credit 
  
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics . 
Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro  (2013) finds that FXI affects exchange rates, and that 
capital controls and FXI are both complements and substitutes: complements because capital 
controls decrease the elasticity of flows with respect to relative rates of return, thereby 
making FXI more powerful; and substitutes because both can be used to affect the exchange 
rate, provided macro policies are appropriate and the flows are having an adverse impact on 
financial and macroeconomic stability. 21  Building on Adler and Tovar (2011) and IMF 
(2013a), this paper estimates the effect of intervention on the exchange rate by applying a 
two-stage regression to account for endogeneity: intervention affects the exchange rate, but 
the decision to intervene depends on the movements in the exchange rate. The first -stage 
regression estimates a central bank ’s FX intervention policy reaction function . The 
regression is estimated country by country, to allow heterogeneity of the response function 
across countries. Decisions on intervention policy are assumed to depend on  recent 
exchange rate moves and volatility, the level of reserves held by the central bank, and the 
extent of exchange rate misalignment.  
In the second stage, each EM ’s exchange rate (and its movements) is modeled as a function 
of short -term interest rate s and longer -term sovereign spreads, commodity prices 
fluctuations, market volatility (as measured by the VIX), as well as the derived central bank 
intervention from the first -stage regression. 22 Interaction terms were also added to gauge 
 
21 However, Svirydzenka and Zhang (forthcoming 2022) finds that such a policy, if prolonged , can generate 
unintended consequences via a potential transmission channel from FXI to the FX risk held by banks through 
their funding conditions. In particular, by limiting the potential for FX volatility, greater FXI incentivizes banks 
to undertake more FX lending, which is sensitive to FX volatility. 
22 The exchange rate equation is estimated separately for the case where foreign exchange is purchased, and 
where it is sold in the first stage. Two types of relationships are estimated: where the dependent variable is (1) 
the change in level of the bilateral exchange rate against the US dollar (change of natural logarithm); or (2) the 
appreciation/depreciation of bilateral exchange rate.  
76
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 20 ---
the effect of CFM s and MPMs, as well as fundamentals, on the effectiveness of FX 
intervention. 
The paper finds spot selling FXI to be effective, particularly when CFMs are in place:  
• Selling foreign reserves is effective at absorbing depreciation pressures. Buying foreign 
reserves is also found to significantly moderate appreciation pressures, particularly 
when reserves are adequate, capital flows are restricted, inflation is well anchored, 
the exchange rate is not overvalued, macroeconomic imbalances are limited, and 
financial markets are less developed. However, although FXI significantly influences 
the pace of exchange rate changes, this work does not find a statistically significant 
impact on the exchange rate level.  
• When CFMs  are in place , selling FX has a larger impac t on stemming depreciation 
pressures, as expected. Countries with CFMs tend to find a larger impact from FXI, as 
this reduces offsetting private capital flows. 
While experience is more limited, recent nonspot FXI seems similarly effective.  Nonspot 
intervention may be different in character than spot FXI, but its impact on the exchange rate 
can be similar. Nonspot intervention does not directly affect the balance of demand and 
supply in the FX market but can indirectly affect the demand for foreign currency by 
providing cover against the risk from the position held by private agents. If it is effective, 
nonspot intervention is likely to work through the same channels—portfolio and signaling—
as spot FX intervention. There is limited experience with nonspot intervention.23  
While the exchange rate significantly affects growth and inflation (Figure 11), developments 
in credit growth are also important for NRE growth and inflation. Inflation and real economic 
conditions respond strongly to credit growth (Figure 10), which may explain why quantity-
based tools such as reserve requirements have traditionally been used by many NREs. This 
finding also suggests that policies such as MPMs, which aff ect the incentives for risk taking 
and borrowing, can influence the business cycle. 
How monetary frameworks have been quantitatively affected using MPMs and CFMs is 
something on which so far only country case studies have concretely focused (Bruno, Shim, 
and Shin 2017 ; Iman, Nier, and Jácome  2012). To extend this analysis, we use panel 
regression analysis and find that there are important interactions between the monetary 
policy response and the use of other policies, such as FXI, in NREs (Figure 12).24 Specifically, 
 
23 Nedeljkovic and Saborowski (2017) finds spot and nonspot intervention to be similarly effective in the case 
of Brazil. The analysis employs a common empirical framework, comparing the Brazilian Central Bank’s (BCB) 
FX intervention in the spot markets with that using nondeliverable futures contracts. The BCB has used both 
these tools jointly to address foreign exchange pressure. The paper finds a significant link between intervention 
(in both spot and derivative markets) and changes in the real/US dollar exchange rate. It also finds that both 
spot and nonspot FXI are effective in affecting implied exchange rate volatility.  
24 “Augmented Taylor rules” account for a broader set of central bank considerations, such as financial stability 
or exchange rate movements unexplained by fundamentals (see Käfer 2014 and references therein). To assess 
central banks ’ reactions to these variables , one needs to deal with the endogeneity issue as, for instance, 
77
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 21 ---
an analysis of augmented Taylor rules for a sample of 79 countries, of which 49 are emerging 
and developing economies, suggests that central banks react to financial sector stability and 
exchange rate concerns, as measured by changes in credit growth and the NEER, that are not 
explained by macroeconomic developments—that is, credit and exchange rate gaps.25 
Figure 11: IRF of Inflation to NEER 
 
 
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics . 
 
  
 
financial variables and exchange rates might both be affected by macroeconomic fluctuations and monetary 
policy decisions. Typical solutions include the use of real-time data and instrumental variable techniques with 
lagged terms of financial, exchange rate, macroeconomic variables, and policy rates.  
25 The variables are chosen specifically to test to what extent NREs ’ monetary policy stance can be explained 
by financial stability or external concerns. In particular, the propensity of monetary policy to react to credit 
considerations in certain circumsta nces has been termed “leaning against the wind ” (IMF 2015). For the 
exchange rate, in the case of inflation-targeting countries , the central bank reacts  only to exchange rate 
volatility that threatens the inflation target rather than for the purpose of sta bilizing the exchange rate.   
78
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 12: Additional Tools Delay the Monetary Response to Credit and Exchange 
Rate Gaps 
  
 
 
 
 
Notes: Blue bars represent the response of the policy rate to a 100 -basis point shock to credit and exchange 
rate gaps (changes in credit growth and the NEER that are not explained by macroeconomic developments). 
The gray bars represent the policy rate response to such gaps when additional tools (MPMs, CFMs, and FXI) are 
applied (that is, these tools are interacted with the credit and exchange rate gaps). */**/*** indicate significance 
at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.  
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Cerutti, Claessens, and Laeven 2015; Fernández et al . 2015; IMF World Economic 
Outlook. 
However, a tightening of MPMs significantly lowers the reaction of policy rates to the credit 
gap. Similarly, a tightening of measures on capital inflows or outflows, or use of FXI, reduces 
the monetary policy reaction to an exchange rate gap (absent such measures, monetary 
policy rates tend to loosen in response to a positive gap, that is , an exchange rate 
appreciation that is not explained by macroeconomic developments). The results in F igure 
79
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 23 ---
12 are qualitatively similar when only EMs are included in the estimation, although the 
extent to which use of MPMs, CFMs, or FXI affects the monetary policy reaction for EMs 
seems somewhat less than for the full sample. 
C. Interest Rate Policy under Extreme External Pressure and FX Market Liquidity 
The experience of Russia in 2014 –2015 provides an interesting case study of the use of 
monetary policy through the interest rate to restore exchange market functioning. In 2014, 
Russia faced two adverse shocks: a drop in the oil price and a sudden closure of access to 
international capital markets due to the sanctions imposed by some countries. These shocks 
resulted in significant market turbulence, large net capital outflows, significant currency  
depreciation―95% over the course of the year―and related inflationary pressures, with 
elevated concerns for financial stability. Given the restricted access Russian banks and 
companies had to external markets, there was significant strain in the FX market. 
On December 16, 2014 , the Central Bank of Russia announced a significant policy 
tightening—raising the policy rate by 650 basis points (bps) to anchor inflation expectations 
including by reducing depreciation expectations and mitigating the pass -through effects on 
inflation. 26  Although liquidity conditions in the FX market tightened upon the policy 
announcement, they soon after began to normalize.  This is discussed in further detail in 
Appendix A. In addition to the policy rate change, the outcome was backed by other 
complementary measures aimed at supporting the stability of the financial system and 
expanding FX liquidity provision to banks, which helped ease funding pressures in the FX 
interbank market. The former included temporary forbearance measures on loan 
classification, provisioning, and valuation accounting. The latter comprised the expansion of 
the collateral acceptable for FX repo auctions and the temporary easing of restrictions in 
banks’ lending and deposit interest rates. The key policy rate was lowered by 200 bps on 
January 31, 2015, and by July 2015 , the interest rate was back to the level prior to the 
December 16, 2014, hike.  
D. The Impact and Effectiveness of Policy Packages 
This section applies models of small open NREs to illustrate the impact of alternative policy 
responses using an expanded tool set.27 Key conclusions are that the effectiveness of a policy 
package is highly dependent on the type of shock and constraints on monetary policy 
transmission such as the effective lower bound (ELB). 
The analysis builds on the findings in the preceding discussio n, which has established that 
(1) monetary policy can transmit through long -term interest rates; ( 2) exchange rate 
 
26 Effective November 10, 2014 , the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) eliminated its exchange rate corridor and 
canceled regular foreign exchange interventions, adopted a de jure floating exchange rate regime (previously a 
de jure other managed).  
27 The models are calibrated to small open economies, and their results are less applicable to more closed NREs, 
accounting also for differences between the models’ results and the empirical evidence in Section III. 
80
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 24 ---
flexibility plays a critical role as a buffer ;28 (3) the credit channel remains effective in many 
NREs; and ( 4) there are important interacti ons among policy instruments that affect the 
impact of an overall package. The discussion compares a policy package with a simpler policy 
response relying on monetary policy and complete exchange rate flexibility. In the first part 
of this section , the add itional tools of FXI and CFMs are discussed. In the second part, the 
effectiveness of a policy package of monetary policy with MPMs aimed at reducing systemic 
risks from foreign currency loans is discussed , including in the case of the lower bound 
constraint on monetary policy. 
Monetary Policy, FXI, and the Impact of CFMs 
This part of the section outlines the impact of different combinations of interest rate policy 
and FXI on the effectiveness of policy in smoothing the impact of external financial and 
domestic demand shocks. In addition, it argues that the existence of CFMs would reduce the 
monetary policy and FXI response. This discussion uses a stylized New Keynesian small 
open-economy model. 
In the stylized setup, based on Escudé (2013) , the central bank  is assumed to manage 
monetary policy through a relatively standard Taylor rule, and also to manage an 
intervention rule to stabilize the exchange rate in the face of shocks. We compare two policy 
regimes: a pure float where the central bank follows only i ts Taylor rule; and a mechanism 
using a combination of interest rate policy based on a Taylor rule and FX intervention, a so -
called managed float regime. Two temporary macroeconomic shocks are considered: (1) an 
external financial conditions shock (modeled as a risk premium shock);29 and (2) a domestic 
demand shock. As elaborated in Appendix B, other domestic shocks, such as a supply shock, 
yield qualitatively similar results.  
• Tighter external financial conditions shock . The introduction of exchange rate 
management via FXI ensures that the interest rate is less responsive to a rise in the 
cost of foreign funds (Figure 13). That is, without FXI, a rise in the risk premium leads 
to a currency depreciation, which via import prices results in higher CPI inflation and 
leads the central bank to raise policy rates. Under the regime with the two policy tools, 
FXI reduces the rate of depreciation and hence lowers the impact on inflation. This 
then results in a lower domestic rate hi ke to achieve domestic inflation, output, and 
employment objectives. Consequently, FX intervention can help manage extreme 
external pressure, especially if the country has substantial exchange rate pass -
through or currency mismatches (that would exacerbate  balance sheet risks 
following currency depreciation).  
• Domestic demand shock . FX intervention tends to shorten the duration of higher 
 
28 Of course, there are costs related to FX intervention such as sterilization costs. However, this paper does not 
explicitly discuss this issue in order to focus on the interaction between FX intervention/MPMs and monetary 
policy instruments. 
29 Given interest rate parity, the risk premium shock is equivalent to a rise in foreign interest rates.  
81
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 25 ---
inflation and the required policy rate hike in response to the domestic demand shock 
(Figure 14). There is little differe nce across the two policy regimes right after the 
shock as they both result in higher inflation and policy rates. However, subsequently, 
FXI limits the extent of exchange rate depreciation and keeps inflation and policy 
rates somewhat lower than when FXI i s not used, at the cost of a more prolonged 
current account deficit and lower output. As such, the smoothing effect of FXI is 
significantly lower in the face of a domestic demand shock compared with the 
external financing shock. 
• Overall, the combined use of monetary policy and FXI tends to smooth the impact of 
the shock on the domestic economy. However, the degree of smoothing crucially 
depends on the nature of shock. The use of FXI has a far greater impact on economic 
developments for an external financing shock than in the case of the demand shock. This 
is because FXI can directly mitigate the external financing shocks given interest rate 
parity, insulating domestic interest rates. 
The combination of FXI and interest rate policy also alters the trade -offs policymakers face 
(Figure 15). The monetary policy frontiers between output and inflation volatility show the 
best (lowest variance) combination of inflation and output variability obtainable given 
alternative weights in the policy rules. 30 That is, for di fferent central bank preferences over 
inflation and output volatility, it shows the best possible outcome. For external financing 
shocks, the two-policy regime is superior to a pure float with a Taylor rule in the sense that the 
obtainable output and inflation volatility is generally preferable to that available under a pure 
float. This suggests that a combination of FX intervention and interest rate policy could achieve 
lower output and inflation volatility in response to external pressures than a single-instrument 
response. For domestic demand shocks, the central bank faces a trade -off between inflation 
and output-gap stabilization, as implied by the negative slope of the frontiers.  
Based on the discussion in previous sections, the existence of CFMs would likely result in a 
smaller response through interest rate policy and FX intervention. In particular, CFMs limit 
the extent of capital flows for any given external shock and their response to any  interest 
rate movement. They also enhance the effectiveness of intervention (as discussed in Section 
IV.B). Thus, the impact of the external financial conditions shock would be smaller, and the 
response of policy rates and the amount of FXI would also be smaller than in the absence of 
CFMs. Given the more limited effect of FXI for the demand shock, the CFMs would mitigate 
the exchange rate impact but not really change the main elements of the policy package. 
Monetary, Fiscal, and Macroprudential Policies When Monetary Policy Is Constrained 
In this  part of the  section, we study the interaction among monetary, fiscal, and 
macroprudential policies in response to external shocks. We find that using a combination 
of policies—for example, having a macroprudential  policy targeted at foreign borrowing —
 
30 Specifically, policy frontiers are derived by altering the Taylor coefficient parameters on output and inflation 
and looking at the simulated volatility of inflation and output for each set of parameters, looking at each shock 
in isolation.  
82
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 26 ---
enhances the effectiveness of the overall policy response, which can ease constraints on 
monetary policy relevant for NREs facing an effective lower bound on policy rates.  
Open-economy dynamic stochastic general equil ibrium (DSGE) models addressing 
interactions between monetary policy and various policy tools to manage external shocks 
are still limited in number. Moreover, most open -economy models do not consider the case 
when monetary policy is constrained, for example, by a lower bound.  
Chen and Laseen (2017) develop s a novel open -economy DSGE model to investigate how 
interactions among monetary, fiscal, and certain macroprudential policies, in the context of 
high foreign currency borrowing, affect the central bank ’s ability to achieve its inflation 
target.31 The analysis considers two policy tools in addition to monetary policy and assumes 
a fully flexible exchange rate. A fiscal authority can raise taxes to finance its expenditures. 
Moreover, a macroprudential autho rity can set a variable levy on foreign borrowing to 
mitigate systemic financial sector risks from the buildup of excessive foreign currency 
exposures.32  
The model results suggest that, in general, having a macroprudential policy instrument is 
more beneficial than a single instrument (interest rate) response. As illustrated in Figure 16, 
in the event of a global supply shock that lowers inflation, the monetary policy responses 
raise inflation faster when the macroprudential instrument is activated to maintain financial 
stability (blue lines) than in its absence (black lines). The policy interest rate does not need 
to be lowered as much where macroprudential policy is activated. The main channel through 
which macroprudential policy helps to raise inflation faster is the exchange rate depreciation 
(lower left panel in Figure 16). In response to the global supply shock, a levy on firms ’ 
borrowing is increased , inducing firms to further reduce the foreign credit (lower right 
panel), which, as a result, weakens the appreciation pressure caused by the shock. Fiscal 
policy in combination with monetary policy also helps to raise inflation faster (red dotted 
line), but its transmission channel is different.  
The results also suggest that the gains from having a macroprudential policy as an additional 
instrument are significantly larger when monetary policy is constrained. Figure 17 shows 
that, when monetary policy is constrained by the ELB, a macroprudential policy instrument 
as considered in the previous paragraph helps to raise inflation much faster toward the 
 
31 Specifically, the lower bound constraints faced by some advanced NREs —and possibly some financially  
integrated EMs —are modeled as an exogenous constraint (fixed l evel of interest rate) below which the 
monetary authority cannot lower policy rates. The model considers the special case of the lower bound fixed 
at zero (which is relevant for advanced NREs but not for most EMs). EM central banks, however, may take as 
an “interim” lower bound a positive level of the interest rate under some circumstances ( for example, fear of 
capital outflows). If the constraint were a small positive number, we would not expect the results to change 
qualitatively. A more complicated case where the constraint is endogenous (for example, related to the level of 
external debt) would be a possible direction for future work.  
32 This policy measure can be considered to be a CFM as well as an MPM.  
83
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 27 ---
target, in turn allowing the policy rate to leave the lower bound earlier. The figures also point 
to higher fiscal multipliers at the ELB, in line with previous studies’ findings. 
Figure 13: The Impact of an External Financing Shock 
 
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics . 
Figure 14: The Impact of a Domestic Demand Shock 
 
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics . 
84
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 28 ---
Figure 15: The Policy Trade-off between Inflation and Output Volatility 
 
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Haver Analytics; IMF International Financial Statistics.  
The macroprudential policy reduces the externality generated by the ELB. As monetary 
policy hits the ELB, domestic bank credit becomes relatively more expensive compared with 
the foreign credit. Thus, firms choose to bo rrow relatively more abroad . This is shown as 
foreign borrowing falling less in the baseline when monetary policy is constrained (Figure 
17) compared with when it is unconstrained (Figure 16). This generates an externality in 
that higher capital inflows cr eate additional appreciation pressure, which the firms do not 
internalize. Macroprudential policy in the model, which is designed to limit the buildup of 
systemic risk, could reduce this externality by making foreign credit more expensive relative 
to domestic funding. Hence, firms would borrow less in international markets , reducing the 
appreciation pressure resulting from the lower bound on interest rates. 33 Fiscal policy, on 
the other hand, carries a larger multiplier because the nominal interest rate is not raised 
(“fixed” at the ELB) in response to an increase in government spending.  
V. Conclusion 
NREs have broadened their policy tool  kit to allow greater exchange rate flexibility while 
including MPMs, FXI, and, to a more limited degree, CFMs over the past 15 years. In response 
to the COVID-19-related shocks, EMs in particular have allowed the exchange rate to play a 
large shock absorber role while the use of CFMs has been limited so far. The wider use of 
these tools—including among AEs after the GFC—has in turn led to growing awareness that 
policy interactions matter. A substantial literature, so far comprising mostly theoretical 
models and country case studies, has examined the impact of policy interactions but not 
directly measured their extent in practic e. To help fill this gap, this paper provides both 
direct measures of the quantitative implications of policy interactions for monetary policy 
independence, monetary policy response, and FXI effectiveness and an assessment of the 
 
33 Interestingly, this effect is similar to the o ne discussed by Jeanne and Svensson (2007) and Eggertsson 
(2006). If the government prints nominal liabilities (such as government bonds or money) and purchases 
foreign exchange, it will incur balance  sheet losses if it reneges on an inflation promise beca use this would 
imply an exchange rate appreciation and thus a portfolio loss.  
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
Outlput volatility
Inflation volatility
Risk-premium shock
Managed ER
Pure Float
1.61
1.71
1.81
1.91
2.01
2.11
2.21
0.12 0.32 0.52 0.72 0.92
Output Volatility
Inflation Volatility
Demand shock
85
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 29 ---
policy mix effectiveness a nd its transmission. A more complete analysis would require the 
establishment of benchmarks for assessing effectiveness of different policy combinations.  
The results confirm that growing financial integration makes NREs susceptible to global 
financial spi llovers. In particular, we find that external real and financial shocks affect 
domestic real and financial conditions, policy transmission to long -term rates, and the 
monetary policy reaction. The dependence of monetary policy on international monetary 
policy spillovers and its response to nontraditional objectives (external and financial 
stability) is attenuated significantly in countries that use FXI and/or activate other tools 
(MPMs and CFMs). We also find that FXI can reduce exchange rate volatility and  is more 
effective with CFMs under some circumstances. 
Our findings finally suggest that a policy response that relies on a combination of 
instruments can sometimes be more effective than a single -instrument response. A model -
based analysis suggests that t he relative effectiveness of a combined monetary policy 
response with FXI to external pressures is highly dependent on the nature of the shocks. FXI 
can help smooth the impact of external financing shocks but adds relatively little to the 
response to domes tic demand (or supply) shocks. In the case of a global disinflationary 
shock, the results from a stylized model suggest that well -targeted MPMs combined with 
monetary policy are more effective at stabilizing inflation and output than monetary policy 
alone, particularly when monetary policy faces constraints such as a zero lower bound.  
It would be important to explore the effectiveness of alternative policies in softening the 
monetary policy response to other types of global financial shocks besides US monetary 
policy shocks. Other interactions between instruments used by NREs to stabili ze their 
economies in the face of shocks could also be explored. Examples include the interaction 
between CFMs/MPMs, FXI/MPMs, and the nexus between fiscal policy and unconventional 
tools (including unconventional monetary policies  recently deployed by som e EMs to 
address market dysfunction from the COVID-19 shock). Lastly, a more granular examination 
should be applied in individual country cases given the specifics of policy transmission and 
shocks affecting the economy (see Fayad and Poirson 2020). This w ould be required to 
translate the high-level approach taken in this paper into practical policy application at the 
country level.   
86
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 30 ---
Figure 16: Monetary Policy Rule: Unconstrained Taylor Rule 
 
                             Interest rate                      Inflation                       Output gap 
 
     Real exchange rate             Government spending            Firm foreign borrowing  
                               
Notes: In percent deviations from steady state. “MP+MPM” line shows responses under combined 
monetary/macroprudential measures. “MP+FP” line shows the responses under combined monetary/fiscal 
policies. 
Source: Chen and Laseen 2017. 
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
87
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 17: Monetary Policy Rule: Max (0, Unconstrained Taylor Rule) 
 
                             Interest rate                       Inflation                      Output gap 
 
  Real exchange rate            Government spending          Firm foreign borrowing  
                                   
Notes: In percent deviations from steady state. “MP+MPM” line shows responses under combined 
monetary/macroprudential measures. “MP+ FP” line shows the responses under combined monetary/fiscal 
policies. 
Source: Chen and Laseen 2017. 
 
 
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
88
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 32 ---
VI. References 
Adler, Gustavo, and C amilo Tovar. 2011. “Foreign Exchange Intervention: A Shield against 
Appreciation Winds?” International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 11/165, July 2011 . 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/Foreign-Exchange-
Intervention-A-Shield-Against-Appreciation-Winds-25040  
Adler, Gustavo, Ruy Lama, and Juan Pablo Medina. 2016 . “Foreign Exchange Intervention 
under Policy Uncertainty.” International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 16/67, March 
2016. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/Foreign-Exchange-
Intervention-under-Policy-Uncertainty-43801  
Adrian, Tobias, Christopher J. Erceg, Jesper Lindé, Pawel Zabczyk, and Jianping Zhou. 2020. 
“A Quantitative Model for the Integrated Policy Framework .” International Monetary Fund 
Working Paper No. 20/122, July 2020.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2020/07/07/A-Quantitative-Model-
for-the-Integrated-Policy-Framework-49555 
Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. 2013. “The ‘Impossible Trinity’ Hypothesis 
in an Era of Global Imbalances: Measurement and Testing .” Review of International 
Economics 21, no. 3: 447–58.   
https://doi.org/10.1111/roie.12047  
Akinci, O zge, and J ane Olmstead-Rumsey. 2018. “How Effective Are Macroprudential 
Policies? An Empirical Investigation .” Journal of Financial Intermediation 33 (January): 33–
57.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2017.04.001  
Arregui, Nicolas, Selim Elekdag, Gaston Gelos, Roman Lafarguette, and Dulani Seneviratne. 
2018. “Can Countries Manage Their Financial Conditions amid Globalization?” International 
Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 18/15, January 2018.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2018/01/24/Can-Countries-Manage-
Their-Financial-Conditions-Amid-Globalization-45581  
Banbura, Marta, Domenico Giannone, and Lucrezia Reichlin. 2010. “Large Bayesian Vector 
Auto Regressions.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 25, no. 1: 71–92.  
https://doi.org/10.1002/jae.1137  
Basu, Suman, Emine Boz, Gita Gopinath, Francisco Roch, and Filiz Unsal. 2020. “A Conceptual 
Model for the Integrated Policy Framework .” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 
No. 20/121, July 2020.   
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2020/07/07/A-Conceptual-Model-for-
the-Integrated-Policy-Framework-49558  
89
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 33 ---
Bernanke, B en S., Jean Boivin, and P iotr Eliasz. 2005. “Measuring the Effects of Monetary 
Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 120, no.1: 387–422.   
https://doi.org/10.1162/0033553053327452  
Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro. 2013. “Rethinking Macro Policy 
II: Getting Granular .” International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note  No. 13/03, April 
2013.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Staff-Discussion-
Notes/Issues/2016/12/31/Rethinking-Macro-Policy-II-Getting-Granular-40477  
Brandao-Marques, L uis, Gaston Gelos, Machiko Narita, and Erlend Nier. 2020. “Leaning 
against the Wind: A Cost-Benefit Analysis for an Integrated Policy Framework.” International 
Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 20/123, July 2020.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2020/07/07/Leaning-Against-the-
Wind-A-Cost-Benefit-Analysis-for-an-Integrated-Policy-Framework-49554  
Bruno, V alentina, Ilhyock Shim, and H yun Song  Shin. 2017. “Comparative Assessment of 
Macroprudential Policies.” Journal of Financial Stability 28 (February): 183–202.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2016.04.001  
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility -Maximizing Framework.” Journal of 
Monetary Economics 12 no. 3: 383–98.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3932(83)90060-0  
Caselli, Francesca G., and Agustin Roitman. 2019. “Nonlinear Exchange Rate Pass-Through in 
Emerging Markets.” International Finance 22, no. 3: 279–306.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/infi.12344  
Cerutti, E ugenio M., Stijn Claessens, and Luv Laeven. 2015. “The Use and Effectiveness of 
Macroprudential Policies: New Evidence.” International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 
15/61, March 2015.   
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/The-Use-and-
Effectiveness-of-Macroprudential-Policies-New-Evidence-42791  
Chen, Jiaqian, and Stefan Laseen. 2017. “External Shocks and the Design of Macroprudential 
Policy at the Zero Lower Bound.” Unpublished manuscript. 
Eggertsson, Gauti, 2006. “The Deflation Bias and Committing to Being Irresponsible.” Journal 
of Money, Credit and Banking 36, no. 2: 283–321.   
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/196984/pdf  
Escudé, Guillermo J., 2013. “A DSGE Model for a SOE with Systematic Interest and Foreign 
Exchange Policies in Which Policymakers Exploit the Risk Premium for Stabilization 
Purposes.” Economics: The Open -Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal 7, no. 2013-30: 1–110. 
https://doi.org/10.5018/economics-ejournal.ja.2013-30   
90
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 34 ---
Fayad, G hada, and H élène Poirson. 2020. “Caught in the Crosswinds: The Experiences of 
Selected Economies Responding to External Volatility with Multiple Policy Levers .” 
International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 20/225, November 2020 . 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2020/11/08/Caught-in-the-
Crosswinds-The-Experiences-of-Selected-Economies-Responding-to-External-49860  
Fernández, A ndrés, Michael W.  Klein, Allesandro Rebucci, Martin Schindler, and M artin 
Uribe. 2015. “Capital Control Measures: A New Dataset, ” International Monetary Fund 
Working Paper No. 15/80, April 2015.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/Capital-Control-
Measures-A-New-Dataset-42867  
Finger, Harald, and Pablo Lopez Murphy. 2019. “Facing the Tides: Managing Capital Flows in 
Asia.” International Monetary Fund, Asia and Pacific Department Paper No. 19/17, October 
2019.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Departmental-Papers-Policy-
Papers/Issues/2019/10/21/Facing-the-Tides-Managing-Capital-Flows-in-Asia-48625  
Frankel, J effrey, David Parsley, and Shang -Jin Wei. 2012. “Slow Pass -Through around the 
World: A New Import for Developing Countries?” Open Economies Review 23, no. 2: 213–51. 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11079-011-9210-8  
Galati, Gabriele, and Richhild Moessner . 2013. “Macroprudential Policy —A Lite rature 
Review.” Journal of Economic Surveys 27, no. 3: 846–78.   
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6419.2012.00729.x  
Gelos, G aston, Lucyna Gornicka, Robin Koepke, Ratna Sahay, and S ilvia Sgherri. 2019. 
“Capital Flows at Risk: Taming the Ebbs and Flows .” International Monetary Fund Working 
Paper No. 19/279, December 2019.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2019/12/20/Capital-Flows-at-Risk-
Taming-the-Ebbs-and-Flows-48878  
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2019) “Exchange Arrangements 
Entering the Twenty-First Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 
134, no. 2: 599-646. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjy033. Dataset accessed at  
https://carmenreinhart.com/exchange-rate/.  
Iman, Patrick A., Erlend Nier and Luis I. Jácome. 2012 . “Building Blocks for Effective 
Macroprudential Policies in Latin America: Institutional Considerations. ” International 
Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 2012/183.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/Building-Blocks-for-
Effective-Macroprudential-Policies-in-Latin-America-Institutional-26059  
International Monetary Fund  (IMF). 2013a . “Assessing Reserve Adequacy —Further 
Considerations.” IMF Policy Paper, November 2013.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2016/12/31/Assessing-
Reserve-Adequacy-Further-Considerations-PP4843  
91
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 35 ---
———. 2013b. “World Economic Outlook.” October 2013.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2016/12/31/Transitions-Tensions  
———. 2015. “Monetary Policy an d Financial Stability .” IMF Policy Paper, August 2015.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2016/12/31/Monetary-
Policy-and-Financial-Stability-PP4982  
———. 2016a. “Reference Note on Unconventional Monetary Policies and Foreign Exchange 
Intervention under Disorderly Market Conditions.” Internal paper. 
———. 2016b. “Asean-5 Cluster Report―Evolution of Monetary Policy Frameworks .” IMF 
Country Report No. 16/176, June 2016.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2016/12/31/Asean-5-Cluster-Report-
Evolution-of-Monetary-Policy-Frameworks-43988  
———. 2017. Global Financial Stability Report, April 2017.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2017/03/30/global-financial-
stability-report-april-2017  
Jeanne, Olivier, and Lars Svensson. 2007. “Credible Commitment to Optimal Escape from a 
Liquidity Trap: The Role of the Balance Sheet of an Independent Central Bank.” American 
Economic Review 97, no. 1: 474–90.  
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.97.1.474  
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Respo nses by Local Projections .” 
American Economic Review 95, no. 1: 161–82.   
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/0002828053828518  
Käfer, Benjamin. 2014. “The Taylor Rule and Financial Stability: A Literature Review with 
Application for the Eurozone.” Review of Economics 65, 159-192.  
https://doi.org/10.1515/roe-2014-0204  
Kim, S oyoung, and N ouriel Roubini. 2000. “Exchange Rate Anomalies in the Industrial 
Countries: A Solution with a Structural VAR Approach .” Journal of Monetary Economics  45, 
no. 3: 561–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3932(00)00010-6  
Lim, Cheng Hoon, Francesco Columba, Alejo Costa, Piyabha Kongsamut, Akira Otani, Mustafa 
Saiyid, Torsten Wezel, and Xiaoyong Wu. 2011. “Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments 
and How to Use Them? Lessons from Country Experiences .” International Monetary Fund 
Working Paper No. 11/238, October 2011.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/Macroprudential-Policy-
What-Instruments-and-How-to-Use-them-Lessons-From-Country-Experiences-25296  
Nedeljkovic, Milan, and Christian Saborowski. 2017. “The Relative Effectiveness of Spot and 
Derivatives Based Intervention: The Case of Brazil .” International Monetary Fund Working 
Paper No. 17/11, January 2017.  
92
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 36 ---
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2017/01/24/The-Relative-
Effectiveness-of-Spot-and-Derivatives-Based-Intervention-The-Case-of-Brazil-44576  
Ostry, J onathan David, Atish R.  Ghosh, and M arcos Chamon. 2012. “Two Targets, Two 
Instruments: Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Market Economies .” 
International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note No. 12/01 , February 2012 . 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Staff-Discussion-Notes/Issues/2016/12/31/Two-
Targets-Two-Instruments-Monetary-and-Exchange-Rate-Policies-in-Emerging-Market-
Economies-25732  
Rey, Hélène. 2015. “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy 
Independence.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21162, May 2015. 
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w21162/w21162.pdf   
Ricci, L uca, and W ei Shi. 2016. “Trilemma or Dilemma: Inspecting the Heterogeneous 
Response of Local Currency Interest Rates to Foreign Rate s.” International Monetary Fund 
Working Paper No. 16/75, March 2016.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/Trilemma-or-Dilemma-
Inspecting-the-Heterogeneous-Response-of-Local-Currency-Interest-Rates-43826  
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe, 2003. “Closing Sma ll Open Economy Models.” 
Journal of International Economics 61, no. 1: 163 –85. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-
1996(02)00056-9  
Sims, Christopher A. 1992. “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The Effects 
of Monetary Policy.” European Economic Review 36, no. 5: 975–1000.  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/001429219290041T  
Svirydzenka, K atsiaryna, and Z hongxia Zhang. 2022. “Unintended Consequences of FX 
Interventions: Dollarization in Emerging Market Economies .” International Monetary Fund 
Working Paper, forthcoming. 
Wu, J ing Cynthia, and F an Dora  Xia. 2016. “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of 
Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 48, no. 2–3: 
253–91.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/jmcb.12300  
Zdzienicka, A leksandra, Sally Chen, Federico Diaz Kalan,  Stefan Laseen, and K atsiaryna 
Svirydzenka. 2015. “Effects of Monetary and Macroprudential Policies on Financial 
Conditions: Evidence from the United States.” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 
No. 15/288, December 2015.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/Effects-of-Monetary-and-
Macroprudential-Policies-on-Financial-Conditions-Evidence-from-the-43508  
  
93
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 37 ---
VII. Appendixes 
Appendix A: The Impact of Interest Rate Policy in the Face of External 
Pressures—the Case of Russia in 2014 
Facing external pressure, the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) introduced a significant change 
in interest rate policy in late 2014. In an unscheduled meeting early on December 16, 2014, 
the CBR decided on a dramatic policy rate hike of 650 basis points  (bps), moving the policy 
rate to 17 %, as a critical compone nt of a comprehensive package. 34  The interest rate 
hike―the sixth hike in 2014―followed a 100 -bp increase in interest rates on December 11 
and the introduction of repo transactions to  normalize foreign exchange ( FX) liquidity 
conditions.35 Nonetheless, the  ruble depreciated following the policy announcement and 
triggered a significant tightening of liquidity conditions in the FX market.  
• Trading volumes increased substantially following CBR’s interest rate hike. 
• Liquidity conditions tightened as the market became one-sided amid rumors of the 
possible introduction of capital controls and political criticism of the CBR. Bid -ask 
spreads increased by more than 617% relative to their average level during the week 
prior to the CBR’s announcement. The effective cos t of transactions increased by 
640% over the same period , and liquidity strains remained in place for a few days 
before normalizing. 
• The impact of trading on the price (exchange rate) increased. The impact of order 
flows on the exchange rate returns increa sed significantly following the CBR’s 
interest rate hike and remained high before normalizing the week after the policy 
event. This suggests that the market struggled to deal with larger transaction 
volumes. The return reversal—that is, the speed with which the exchange rate return 
converges to fundamentals —recovered to its normal dynamics (as indicated by the 
negative coefficient in Figure 18).  
  
 
34 The CBR also announced that it intended to introduce in the “near future” foreign exchange lending secured 
by nonmarketable assets. These complementary measures were implemente d on December 18. 
35  On November 10 , the  CBR abolished the dual currency soft peg along with its automatic 
interventions―putting an end two decades of exchange rate controls. With this decision , the  CBR began to 
intervene in the market to address “financial stability threats” and moved the FX regime closer to a free float.  
94
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 38 ---
Figure 18: Liquidity Conditions in the FX Market around the December 16, 2014, 
Hike in the Key Policy Rate 
Note: For definitions, see text. 
Sources: Authors’ calculations; Electronic Broking Services (EBS) data. 
  
  
Week before 
Dec. 16 Dec. 16 Dec. 
17 
Week after 
Dec. 17 
Memo: Full 
sample 
Bid-ask spread (bps) 14.38 88.8
5 
242.
91 64.44 10.03 
Effective cost of 
transaction (bps) 1.65 10.5
6 
14.4
4 14.60 1.06 
Price impact (bps) 2.50 13.5
6 
13.5
6 –0.42 0.80 
Traded volume (index) 89.01 130.
82 
72.5
9 36.78 101.95 
95
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 39 ---
Appendix B: Monetary Policy, FXI, and the Impact of CFMs 
This appendix aims at investigating the economic theory behind various monetary policy 
regimes and evaluating the implications of policy design in managing the cycle. The key 
questions that this appendix addresses are how to explicitly account for a central bank (CB) 
intervention policy and to what degree the augmentation of the interest -rate-setting rules 
with exchange rate management can in fact lead to better policy outcomes. We draw heavily 
on the model by Escudé (2013). 
Model Overview 
The model closely follows a standard New Keynesian small open-economy model as outlined 
in Escudé (2013) using the Dynare code provided by the authors. Households consume both 
domestic and imported goods, hold financial wealth in the form of domestic bonds issued by 
the CB, and can borrow from abroad by issuing foreign currency bonds. In this sense , the 
asset market structure in incomplete. The rate at which households can borrow in the 
international markets consists of the international risk -free rate 𝑖∗ augmented by an 
endogenous risk premium that depends on the aggregate debt-to-GDP ratio (Schmitt-Grohé 
and Uribe 2003). Production is carried out by firms producing domestic goods as well as 
exports. Price setting is staggered as in Calvo (1983), and the export good is envisaged to be 
a primary good (commodity). The central bank issues currency and domestic currency bonds 
and holds international reserves (Rs) in the form of foreign currency–denominated risk-free 
bonds issued by the rest of the world. 
(1) Modelling Risk Premium 
The rate at which residents borrow in international markets is defined by: 
1 + 𝑖𝑡
𝐷 = (1 + 𝑖𝑡 
∗ )𝜙∗𝜏𝐷 (𝑆𝑡𝐷𝑡
𝑃𝑡𝑌𝑡
) 
where 𝑆𝑡 is the nominal exchange rate (domestic/foreign currency) ; 𝐷𝑡 is foreign debt; 𝑃𝑡𝑌𝑡 
is the nominal GDP ; 𝜙∗ is an exogenous stochastic component that can capture shocks to 
international liquidity ; and 𝜏𝐷 (
𝑆𝑡𝐷𝑡
𝑃𝑡𝑌𝑡
)  is the gross risk premium , which is an increasing 
function of the foreign debt-to-GDP ratio. This captures the idea of a debt-elastic interest rate 
(Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe 2003), which ensures stationarity in the model.  
(2) Monetary Policy 
The central bank issues currency 𝑀𝑡, which is held by households to lower transaction costs, 
issues domestic currency bonds 𝐵𝑡, and holds international re serves ( 𝑅𝑡) in the form of 
foreign currency–denominated risk-free bonds issued by the rest of the world. Any profits 
related to interest earned and capital gains from holding reserves are assumed to be 
transferred to the government every period (Adler, Lama, and Medina 2016), making central 
banks’ net worth constant. The flow budget constraint of the CB is: 
96
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.

--- Page 40 ---
𝑀𝑡 + 𝐵𝑡 − 𝑆𝑡𝑅𝑡 = 𝑀𝑡−1 + (1 + 𝑖𝑡−1)𝐵𝑡−1 − (1 + 𝑖𝑡−1
∗ )𝑆𝑡𝑅𝑡−1 
= 𝑀𝑡−1 + 𝐵𝑡−1 − 𝑆𝑡−1𝑅𝑡−1 − 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑠𝑖_𝑓𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙 
where quasi_fiscal refers to the interest income and capital gains from FX reserves assumed 
to be transferred to the government every period. The CB balance at each period can 
therefore be stated as 𝑀𝑡 + 𝐵𝑡 − 𝑆𝑡𝑅𝑡 = 0, which can be interpreted as the CB constraint and 
dictates the sterilization of FX intervention.36  
(a) Taylor Rule  
1 + 𝑖𝑡
1 + 𝑖 = (1 + 𝑖𝑡−1
1 + 𝑖 )
ℎ0
(𝜋𝑡
𝜋𝑇)
ℎ1
(𝑌𝑡
𝑌)
ℎ2
(𝑒𝑡
𝑒 )
ℎ3
 
Where h0 captures the inertia of setting interest rates not too different from last period’s and 
h1, h2, and h3 capture the weight placed on minimizing deviations from the target inflation, 
steady-state output, and the real exchange rate, respectively.37 
(b) Intervention Policy 
In the expression below, a second operational target is introduced : the rate of nominal 
depreciation, whose instrument is the buying/selling of FX reserves by the CB. Although this 
operational target can also respond to the same variables as in the Taylor rule, in this 
baseline, we assume k0=k1=k2=k3=0. The coefficient on foreign reserves k4 is negative—an 
increase in international reserves lowers the rate of deprecation and vice versa. 
𝛿𝑡
𝛿 = (𝛿𝑡−1
𝛿 )
𝑘0
(𝜋𝑡
𝜋𝑇)
𝑘1
(𝑌𝑡
𝑌)
𝑘2
(𝑒𝑡
𝑒 )
𝑘3
(𝑒𝑡 𝑟𝑡/𝑌𝑡
𝑒 𝑟/𝑌 )
𝑘4
 
where δ is the nominal depreciation rate and r is the stock of FX reserves.  
In the benchmark simulations , we try to show how the introduction of a second rule alters 
the response to different shocks and what that implies for the volatility trade -offs between 
Consumer Price Index inflation and output as we alter the policy parameters. For the 
 
36 This is a stylized assumption to simplify notation. Some central banks transfer such amounts annually rather 
than each period. Our assumption does not impact on the model’s economic results provided the amounts are 
saved and sterilized until they are transferred. Assuming that the CB is reimbursed for its capital losses ignores 
a main concern about sterilized foreign exchange intervention (FXI), which is the cost of carry in case the return 
on reserves is lower that the local interest rate on bonds, or in case the exchange rate (S) appreciates and drags 
the CB to a negative capital position. This quasi-fiscal cost reflects the price of FX purchases as a shield against 
appreciation pressures. In practice, the level of reserves is likely to influence FXI decisions beyond a certain 
threshold. This threshold is not considered in the model.  
37 The Taylor rule specification is used to mim ic the actual observed behaviors of monetary policy. This does 
not necessarily mean that the central bank attempts to stabilize the exchange rate (ex ante). Inflation-targeting 
central banks will react to exchange rate volatility only if it threatens the inflation target. 
97
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 41 ---
benchmark results in Section IV.D of the paper, the following parameters are used: h0=0.2; 
h1=1.2; h2=0.02; h3=0; k0=k1=k2=k3=0; k4=-0.005. 
(3) Optimal Simples Rules 
The central bank is assumed to minimize a simple quadratic loss function, which is a 
weighted sum of the volatility of output, inflation, and interest rate changes as well as 
changes in the rate of depreciation. Under the pure float regime, the optimal simple rule 
implies choosing parameters h0, h1, h2, and h3 of the Taylor rule above. Under the managed 
float regime, this instead implies choosing h0, h1, and h2 of the Taylor rule  and k4 of the 
intervention policy. We note that, for simplicity, we are focusing on the type of intervention 
policy that targets the rate of depreciation and where k1, k2, k3=0. 
𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 = 𝑤𝜋𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝜋) + 𝑤𝑦𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑦) + 𝑤∆𝑖 (∆𝑖) + 𝑤∆𝛿 𝑉𝑎𝑟 (∆𝛿) 
 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which 
allows sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may 
not be changed or used commercially.   
 
 
 
98
Managing External Volatility Poirson et al.