--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Anatomy of a Trade: The Making of a Subprime CDO Anatomy of a Trade: The Making of a Subprime CDO 
Steven H. Kasoff 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kasoff, Steven H. (2022) "Anatomy of a Trade: The Making of a Subprime CDO," Journal of Financial 
Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 379-406. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1268 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/12 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/12

--- Page 3 ---
Anatomy of a Trade: The Making of a Subprime CDO* 
Steven H. Kasoff† 
Author’s Note 
This article presents a short story, a sketch in eight parts of a single fictitious subprime 
collateralized debt obligation (CDO) transaction. The story is informed by expert interviews, 
documentary research, and the author’s firsthand experience. 
This anatomy of a subprime trade breaks down the different parts of the CDO origination 
process and shows the ways that they connect.  The fictionalized format helps do that as 
vividly as possible.  The timing of the story’s chapters show s the sequence of key events in 
the creation of a typical CDO, beginning with a hedge fund manager’s proposal to his 
investment committee. From ensuing scenes inside a large Wall Street dealer to the buy-side 
investor’s discussion, we see various players interacting with each other. The give and take 
from the different sides distills the different perspectives documented in the expert 
interviews into one imaginary deal. 
The fictionalized account also allows the anatomy of the subprime trade to move freely, 
unconstrained by real -world confidentiality concerns. In conducting our oral history 
research, we recognized the obligations of the investors and market actors we interviewed 
to maintain complete confidentiality on matters pertaining to their present and fo rmer 
employers and clients. Our standard interviewing rules, therefore, were to not ask about or 
discuss particular deals, people, or firms they had been involved with. There are no real 
clients or counterparties in this story. 
Writing in the story format also helped us to distill the essence of the events, players, and 
deal structures. This anatomy , therefore, is a simplified, stylized version of what typically 
was happening during the subprime CDO era. Many of the more technical details naturally 
fell by the wayside. For more complete and technical details, the reader should refer to the 
interview summaries and full transcripts at the Yale Program on Financial Stability archive. 
The reader will find two graphics that help visualize the pieces and links wit hin a CDO deal. 
The first shows the structure of a typical CDO. The second depicts the trades and parts of a 
synthetic subprime CDO in which a hedge fund has participated on the short side. A glossary 
of key terms follows the story. 
 
* This article is part of a special project of the Yale Program on Financial Stability–Lessons Learned Oral History 
Project: Inside the CDO Machine, which can be accessed at our website here,  
https://som.yale.edu/centers/program-on-financial-stability/lessons-learned-oral-history-project. 
† Yale School of Management Fellow and former equity partner and head of real estate and structured products 
investments at the Elliott Management Corp., a global hedge fund.  
379

--- Page 4 ---
Delving into the details of the subprime CDO trade of 2005–07 is potentially valuable in two 
regards. First, it helps us come to a better understanding of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), 
specifically the ways that the subprime market was connected to the key factors and 
dynamics that propelled contagion throughout the global system. Second, beyond the GFC, 
we suspect that students of financial crises will recognize particular dynamics and patterns 
in the CDO deal -making that transcend this particular era and relate to other cr ises—past, 
present, and future. 
We hope that the reader finds the story illuminating and is inspired to read the interviews. 
As the interviews demonstrate, the scenes detailed in the anatomy story will be completely 
familiar and recognizable to those who lived through that period—a “real fiction,” a genuine 
representation of one deal from start to finish. 
Disclaimer 
The following is a series of fictionalized descriptions of actual behaviors and activities observed 
by the author, directly or through contemporaneous secondhand accounts  of others.  These 
descriptions are a mosaic of many such observ ations; as such, none of the parties or events 
described represent any specific firm, person , or singular event, including the author or his 
former employers, and any similarities are purely coincidental. 
380
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Hedge Fund Internal Meeting 
Presentation by Portfolio Manager to Investment Committee (excerpt) 
Fall 2005 
Background 
• The market for subprime mortgages has grown significantly in recent years. 
• This growth has been fueled by historically low interest rates and strong home price 
appreciation (HPA) in all regions. 
• Housing affordability is poor, pushing additional borrowers into subprime. 
• Subprime borrowers are stretching to buy homes that they can’t afford, both in terms 
of price (LTVs above 80, and often above 90) and budget (DTI above 40). 
• These borrowers have the worst credit scores —it is not atypical to see younger 
borrowers, first -time home buyers, and self -employed workers.  Most also have 
significant other installment debt (auto, cards, etc.). 
• More recently, loan underwriting standards have fallen, and it is now common that 
borrowers don’t document income, employment, assets, etc. 
Subprime RMBS Structure 
• Typically, 70–80% of the capital structure is AAA, with skinni er tranches at each 
rating category below that. 
• We focused on BBB tranches, which generically represent the 2 –6% slice of the 
securitization, e.g. 2% subordination and 6% thick.  Losses exceeding 7 –10% of the 
mortgage pool will wipe out this tranche (this t hreshold exceeds the subordination 
amount because most structures can also use excess spread to absorb losses). 
• RMBS servicers typically advance unpaid mortgage P&I (principal and interest) to the 
structure. When defaulted mortgages are eventually resolved, any collections first 
reimburse these advances, which will increase the severity of loss severity. 
• Despite being so junior in the structure, the BBB rating drives demand from real 
money investors such as insurance companies, and in recent years, the fast-growing 
“ABS CDO” market. Please refer to the attached diagram. 
• BBB tranches (and often there are separate BBB+, BBB, and BBB - tranches) trade 
between L IBOR+100 and L IBOR+300, with variations based on rating, collateral 
quality, and market conditions. 
381
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 6 ---
Investment Proposal and Rationale 
• Subprime borrowers represent the bottom 10–20% of the mortgage market by credit 
quality. In the event of even a mild recession, they are disproportionately more likely 
to encounter financial stresses that could lead to an inability to pay their mortgages. 
• Most RMBS pools have high geographic concentrations in states that have 
experienced significant HPA in recent years (CA, FL, AZ, TX, NV). A correction in home 
prices in these regions will increase loss s everities, likely well beyond the market’s 
expectations. (We also believe negative HPA correlates with higher default rates.) 
• BBB tranches can be shorted using the newly standardized “pay-as-you-go” CDS. We 
would trade under existing ISDAs and trading lines. The cost is similar to the trading 
spreads on the cash tranches (e.g., 100–300 bp). Unlike corporate CDS, these CDS do 
not expire—they last for the entire life of the reference tranche. 
• Initial margin (IM) will be 3 –6% of notional (2 –3x the CDS spread). As the product 
matures, we expect that margin requirements will drop further.  However, even at 
these IMs, the trade is very efficient to carry. 
• Domestic consumption is a major driver of the US economy.  In a recession, even a 
mild or regional event , consumption is the key underlying factor connecting (1) the 
stock prices of our core long positions and (2) subprime borrower financial health. 
• Therefore, subprime CDS represents a highly leveraged option on US macro 
conditions. Although priced as a very out of the money (OTM) option, we believe the 
potential for payoff is far higher than implied by market prices. 
• Comparing subprime CDS to our other hedges (mostly S&P puts and 10-year Treasury 
calls), we find this to compare very favorably and recommend r eallocating a large 
portion of our hedge book into this product. 
  
382
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1: Structure of a Typical CDO 
 
Source: Created by Yale Program on Financial Stability.  
383
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 8 ---
Large Investment Bank/Broker-Dealer Internal Meeting 
RMBS/CDO Structuring/Trading Desk—Transcript (excerpts) 
Fall 2005 
RMBS Head Trader: As you know, we recently agreed with the rest of the Street on the final 
ISDA docs for the standardized “pay -as-you-go” CDS.  It was a long night in a windowless 
conference room, with a lot of stale pizza. But I can already say that it was worth it. 
Risk Manager: I agree with that as well.  When we first started trading subprime CDS, each 
confirm was bespoke and negotiated with the counterparties. Unlike trading bonds, or even 
some of the vanilla corporate CDS, we can’t just assign the old trade over to the new 
counterparty. There’s no central clearing either.  So, if we bought protection on something 
for 125 bp and then sold protection on that same thing to someone else at 135  bp, we still 
have some risk.  Both trades will live on our books for years.  We did make 10  bp running, 
which might have a PV  [present value]  of a half point.  And yes, we book that into P&L 
immediately. But if something goes wrong and the credit event terms don’t match in the two 
trades, we could have real exposure.  With the standardized template, we still live with two 
trades, but at least the terms match exactly and we don’t have any residual risk except 
counterparty credit. I can say that our regulators and auditor are also very pleased with this. 
RMBS Head Trader: Thanks. Now that you’ve put everyone to sleep, let me say what we all 
actually care about.  Our customers like this product, and they want to trade it.  A lot. Our 
volumes are up a ton, and the bid/ask in the market has held up. You can all see the P&L, and 
it’s going to get even better.  Even if we tighten the bid/ask, which we might want to  do, so 
we can be a dominant market maker. 
Structured Credit Sales Manager: Let me expand on that thread.  This trade is getting a lot of 
attention in the hedge fund community. We certainly pitched it aggressively at the ABS East 
conference a few weeks ago in Boca.  But it’s taken on a life of its own.  The hedgies love it.  
And these are guys that never traded RMBS before. They’re smart guys and have done some 
homework, but they’re really just focused on it as a macro trade.  They don’t know how to 
analyze these structures.  Some of them don’t even have Intex, but they’re still trading, just 
from the pool strats in the prospectus. They don’t know which shelves trade rich or anything 
like that. So, I think bid/ask spreads will hold up for a while. The scale of demand is big, and 
they’re impatient to get the trade on. 
Head of CDO Structuring: So, as everyone knows, the hedge funds are on the short side of this 
trade. And apparently some of the banks, our competitors, are also holding a lot of the shorts 
for themselves. On the long side, we’ve been placing some of this with insurance companies 
and other real money investors, but as volumes grow, it’s clearly the CDOs that will buy most 
of it. We’re seeing it already. Ramping up a normal ABS CDO is so hard. It takes months, and 
we have to warehouse that risk along the way. Now that timeline gets compressed. We make 
just as much per deal. Actually more, since we can make the deals larger. And we can do even 
more deals. 
384
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
Risk Manager: I wanted to ask about the collateral posting.  There’s a mismatch there, right? 
Also, I mentioned counterparty risk a few minutes ago— 
RMBS Head Trader: Sorry to interrupt.  Actually, not really sorry.  By the way, do you even 
need to be at this meeting?  Stop worrying about counterparty risk.  The hedge funds are all 
on the short side. If the market blows up, we don’t need to worry about their credit, because 
their trades will be in the money. And the CDOs hold cash collateral. So, no risk there, right? 
Head of CDO Structuring: Yes, that’s an important feature of the synthetic CDO.  Even though 
the CDO’s “assets” are all synthetic, e.g. , they’ve sold pro tection via CDS, the CDO tranches 
they create are still cash.  So those AAA, AA, A, etc. tranches that we sell are for cash.  That 
cash sits in a trust within the CDO, and if there’s a CDS credit event, we just call up the CDO’s 
trustee and they send us some of that cash. 
Risk Manager: But we have a funding exposure, don’t we?  If the trade goes in the money for 
the hedge fund, we post collateral to them.  But we don’t get any from the CDO.  I know it’s 
there; it’s not a credit risk. But we have to fund the difference, unlike a normal back-to-back 
between regular counterparties, where we’re posting and receiving equal collateral. 
Head of CDO Structuring: Well, yes, that’s true. But not a big issue. You said it—no credit risk, 
just funding temporarily. What’s our balance sheet now? $100 billion? 200? Our CP trades at 
LIBOR minus 5. I think we can swing this without breaking a sweat.  But if it really bothers 
you, there are some European banks that would intermediate this for us. So, we’d face them 
on the CDS, and then they face the CDO on a back -to-back. I think they’d charge us 5  bp 
running, which is a great business for them and a dumb thing for us to do. 
RMBS Head Trader: Well, this is so fascinating . . . It reminds me why I couldn’t stand being a 
structurer and moved to trading.  What everyone needs to know is this —how the market 
really works. The CDO managers, when they start ramping up a deal, they come up with a list 
of the best subprime bonds.  Yeah, that’s an oxymoron, but whatever.  Even the hedge funds 
know those are not the ones they want to short.  Or they will but at a tight spread.  Then my 
structurer friend here needs to have a tough call to explain that the CDO portfolio needs to 
have enough yield for us to syndicate the whole thing.  So now they need to hold their nose 
and look for slightly hairier subprime bonds that they’re willing to buy.  So that works, sort 
of. The yield is good but not great. The arb still doesn’t work. 
Head of CDO Structuring: That’s the nature of the product.  The CDO assets need to  yield 
enough to pay the CDO tranches and still have something extra left over.  Otherwise, no one 
would create them.  A good CDO manager will find ways to generate yield, but they’ll do it 
smartly. That’s why they’re getting paid. 
RMBS Head Trader: Is that so? I’ll take your word for it.  Now back in the real world —what 
actually happens is that there are a couple smart hedge funds. They also know the difference 
between regular crappy subprime originators and the really horrid ones.  And they do an 
OWIC. Get it? Like a BWIC, bids wanted in comp, when you sell a bond? But they’re soliciting 
385
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 10 ---
people to offer protection on the worst subprime bonds they can find. And guess what? Those 
CDO managers that you guys think are so talented —that you take to London, Frankfu rt, 
Singapore, and Tokyo, spending my profits on unnecessary boondoggles —they convince 
themselves that it’s OK to have 5% or 10% of their portfolio in those turds.  That’s how they 
get the yield they need, and my structuring friend here puts it into his Excel, and he’s happy. 
And like he said, the timeline is fast, and the deal closes, and we make a nice profit.  If it 
eventually goes sideways, I’m glad you’re the ones that’ll need to explain it to your accounts 
that you sold it to. 
Conversation Among Principals of Soon-to-Be Created CDO Manager  (currently 
employed at large mutual fund company) 
Summary of Email Exchange 
January 2006 
Portfolio Manager: Our annual bonuses get paid next week. As soon as the checks clear, you 
and I need to be ready. We’ll both resign on the same day. 
Senior Analyst: I’m ready but a bit nervous. I know it’ll be a big step for me, but I’m worried 
about the risk.  How long before we can start taking a salary?  You’ve already made a lot of 
money. I don’t have much saved up. 
Portfolio Manager: I’m putting in a lot of that cash to fund the start -up expenses. And I’m 
giving you equity in the business. I told you already that the team at our favorite investment 
bank is ready to open a warehouse for us and start taking us on the road to meet investors. 
Senior Analyst: I know. We have a good track record.  Will our current employer let us use 
those numbers? Can they stop us? 
Portfolio Manager:  Sure, we can use it.  And everyone knows us anyway.  A lot of that is 
publicly available. You just stay on top of the market. A few weeks after we leave, we’ll be up 
and running at our new office. And you can start buying as much of the new issue pipeline as 
you can. We need to ramp up that first deal fast, so we can get it into the market.  Then we 
start receiving fees. 
Senior Analyst: How many deals do we need to do before the fees cover our running costs? 
Portfolio Manager: Probably two or three.  Then after that it all goes to the bottom line.  We 
should be able to crank out a deal every quarter.  In two years, we’ll have $4 billion of AUM.  
Do the math on the fees from that! 
Senior Analyst: That’s a lot of bonds to buy.  Can we use CDS also? That would make it much 
easier. 
386
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
Portfolio Manager: Sure. You’ve seen these synthetic CDOs? More and more. The banks love 
them too! They have hedge funds banging down their doors to short subprime.  Those guys 
have no idea which deals are good or bad. Some of the banks are even shorting too. 
Senior Analyst: The banks? Why would they do that? Are they worried about the market? 
Portfolio Manager:  A lot of reasons that might not have anything to do with the market.  
Maybe they’re hedging their RMBS origination business.  Or even these warehouses they do 
for us. They take that risk themselves.  Or some risk manager decided it was a good idea.  
Maybe they’ll even short some bonds to us, to help speed up the ramp up of our deal. 
Senior Analyst: You know they’re about to launch the ABX Index. What if all those hedge funds 
and banks just want to short that?  We can’t just buy ABX as the assets for our CDO.  Our 
investors expect us to build a differentiated portfolio. 
Portfolio Manager: The dealer’s trading desk will handle that. If a hedge fund shorts ABX and 
the dealer buys it, then what happens?  They can’t sell it to CDOs, as you pointed  out. And I 
think the CDOs have priced everyone else out of the market. So, the dealers just synthetically 
sell us some other subprime bonds.  That’s what they do.  They keep that basis risk on their 
books. Just like how the corporate CDS traders have been doing for the last few years. 
Senior Analyst:  And you really think the hedge funds will buy protection on the better 
subprime deals? They don’t know the difference? I heard a rumor that a bunch of hedge funds 
were doing group trips to see the housing markets in California, Arizona, Florida.  I think 
they’re starting to get smarter on this. 
Portfolio Manager: Some will. Others will just think it’s a macro trade and buy anything. And 
some will decide that they’re too cheap to short the bad deals. They’ll want to short the better 
deals because the spreads will be lower. 
Large European Commercial Bank Internal Communication 
Email from Internal Treasury Manager to Senior Department Head (excerpt) 
February 2006 
I would like to follow up on our meeting last week regarding investments in CDOs backed by 
US subprime risk.  During that meeting , you commented that the lending environment that 
the bank faces in its core business lines has become very competitive.  In some key markets, 
the bank must lend at levels tha t are unprofitable, such as for long -standing corporate 
customers or to maintain market share or franchise perception.  The proposed investments 
in subprime CDOs can provide a level of profitability that may help offset these lower-margin 
areas. 
We propose a significant investment of the bank’s balance sheet in CDO tranches with ratings 
of AAA, AA, and A. These tranches carry spreads over LIBOR well in excess of similarly rated 
alternatives, yet carry the same requirements for reserves, under both the existi ng and 
387
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 12 ---
proposed new regulatory and risk -based capital rules. As such, the ROE to the bank is very 
compelling. 
In the case of AAA -rated tranches, we can expect yields of L+30  bp. In contrast, AAA-rated 
corporates yield less than LIBOR. We can also buy insurance on the tranches from a monoline 
insurance company at a cost of 8 –10 bp per annum.  While arguably unnecessary from a 
credit perspective, doing so reduces the regulatory capital required to zero.  As we fund our 
balance sheet at LIBOR minus 5  bp, we net earn 25 bp running, while using no capital; an 
infinite ROE (return on equity). This is the “negative basis trade” we discussed. 
Tranches rated AA and A yield L+60  bp and L+150 bp, respectively. The capital required is 
low as well, also making these investments very efficient and with high ROEs. By comparison, 
A-rated corporates yield L+30–40 bp. 
There were a number of questions asked about the risks of the US housing market, and in 
particular the subprime part of that market.  It is correct that subprime borrowers have 
weaker credit than prime borrowers. It is also correct that loan underwriting standards have 
deteriorated in the past two years.  These headline risks are the primary reason that yields 
are wider than for similarly rated alternatives . However, that risk is mitigated in a number 
of important ways, leading to our conclusion that subprime CDOs represent an excellent risk-
reward profile. The mitigants are summarized below. 
1. Asset value: Subprime mortgages represent a first lien on the home. These mortgages 
are originated at 80–90 LTV. Even if we accept that the borrower is not a strong credit, 
the fallback for repaying the mortgage is anchored by the value of the house. 
2. HPA history: Our economics team has done a robust macro analysis of the US housing 
market and believes the downside risks to be small.  While the market may cool off, 
and could even drop in select regions, such a scenario is unlikely to result in 
significant default rates. In fact, at the national level, the US housing market has not 
experienced a year-over-year drop in house prices since the 1930s. 
3. Homeowner equity: As mentioned in #1, homeowners have equity in their homes. This 
provides a first-loss cushion in the event of a default. Additionally, it provides a sense 
of owner ship that is important for borrower behavior.  Homeowners will likely 
continue paying their mortgage regardless of the home value unless they experience 
a stressful personal event such as loss of employment. 
4. Structural subordination in the subprime RMBS : The BBB tranches of the subprime 
RMBS securitizations typically have 4–5% subordination. Historically, lifetime losses 
on subprime mortgage pools have been less than 2%.  Therefore, the losses need to 
significantly exceed historical levels before those tranches will absorb losses. 
5. Structural subordination in the CDO: Even if losses occur as described in #4, the CDO 
offers another layer of subordination. Subordination levels for the A, AA, and AAA are 
388
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
typically 10%, 15%, and 30%, respectively. Therefore, losses on a few outlier RMBS 
will not impact our CDO tranches. Only if a significant portion of the underlying RMBS 
experience losses will we be at risk. 
6. Rating agencies: The rating agencies have devoted significant time and resources to 
monitoring and rating these transactions. As risk-averse organizations that have been 
in business for nearly a century, and without the profit goals of other financial market 
players, they have a strong incentive to preserve their reputation. As such, we believe 
the ratings are likely conservative estimates of the true risk. 
7. CDO manager expertise: We have conducted numerous meetings with CDO managers 
and have ranked them according to their skills and experience.  While there  is no 
doubt that some RMBS tranches are riskier than others, we believe that the CDOs we 
will propose for investment have savvy CDO managers that will navigate the market 
effectively. 
Hedge Fund Internal Phone Call  
Conversation between Portfolio Manager and General Partner—Transcript (excerpt) 
March 2006 
Portfolio Manager: Hi. I wanted to run a new idea by you. We’ve been shorting subprime for 
a few months now and have a decent position.  There’s good liquidity in ABX, so we use that 
a lot. But as we’ve built up our research capabilities, we’ve been able to identify subprime 
deals that have much riskier mortgages in them. 
General Partner: Yes, that’s great work. I want to keep shorting those deals.  As much as we 
can. Even if it’s more expensive than ABX. 
Portfolio Manager:  Right. Totally agree.  The problem is that the CDO managers still have 
some discipline. We’ve found some deals where the risks are layered in subtle ways, and the 
CDO managers don’t mind taking those.  But most of what we want  to short  . . .  the CDO 
managers don’t want.  If we pay up, they’ll take a few here and there, but it’s limited.  And 
we’re not the only hedge fund trying to get these. 
General Partner: OK, so what’s the new idea? 
Portfolio Manager: I’ve been talking to one of the dealers, and they have a new CDO manager 
that they’re trying to help launch. These are guys with a decent reputation. They recently left 
a big mutual fund company, and they had a five -star rating. But they want to get a couple 
CDOs ramped up quickly. So the opportunity is for us to “partner” with them, to sponsor the 
deal. 
General Partner: Partner? What does that mean? 
389
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 14 ---
Portfolio Manager:  Well, “partner” is the wrong word.  Our relationship will still be arm’s 
length. But we’re going to put a list together of 50–100 subprime tranches that we want to 
short. Not all of them can be the crappiest deals, but a lot of them can be.  The CDO manager 
might kick a few out, but we’ll negotiate to get a list that we all agree on —$500 million of 
total size. We’ll short the whole thing, and the new CDO will take the long side. Instant ramp-
up for them and block size for us. 
General Partner: OK, that sounds good. At what price? 
Portfolio Manager: The dealer will validate that it’s a midmarket price, and maybe they’ll take 
a few basis points out for themselves.  But we get a big trade on right away, without having 
to fight in the market on the bid lists. The CDO manager is under pressure to get started, so I 
think they’ll accept more of the bad subprime bonds than others might. 
General Partner: So, what do you think the average spread will be on our shorts? Maybe 250 
bp? So $500 million, we’ll pay $12.5  million per year? That’s a lot, so let’s make sure we’re 
shorting enough of the ones we really hate. 
Portfolio Manager:  OK, so here’s the part that’s most interesting.  We’ve seen a few other 
hedge funds do this already. Not only will we short the subprime tranches into the CDO, we’ll 
also buy the equity tranche of the CDO. 
General Partner: Buy it? Explain that to me. 
Portfolio Manager: I just emailed you a diagram that describes the CDO and the trades we 
would do. Keep in mind that the equity is only 4% of the CDO. So $20mm of investment. But 
while the portfolio is performing, the equity will pay out $5 –$6mm per year, depending on 
how tightly the other CDO tranches get priced.  So, of the $12.5mm per year that we pay as 
CDS premium into the CDO, the CDO uses about $7mm to pay interest costs on the senior 
tranches. Then the rest of it gets paid to the equity tranche, so we’re getting back almost half 
of what we paid. And we’ve only given up the first 4% of upside on the shorts. 
General Partner: I see it now. It’s like a correlation trade. If the CDO portfolio has losses on a 
few of the bonds we shorted, our ga ins on the shorts will be offset by losses on the CDO 
equity. But the market and the rating agencies and everyone else have mispriced the 
correlation. 
Portfolio Manager: Exactly. How could only a few of these take losses?  If some do, then the 
housing market is rolling over and subprime borrowers are defaulting en masse, and most of 
the other deals will take losses too. It’s sort of like all or nothing. We save almost half the cost 
of the short position, and we only sacrifice the first $20mm of potential gains. 
General Partner: I love it. It means we can increase our position size to a lot more than what 
I was targeting. For the same cost. And so, if we’re wrong and the market never cracks, this 
CDO equity just keeps paying out $5–$6mm per year? 
390
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
Portfolio Manager: Yes, but it’s even better than that.  If you own the equity, or technically 
just a majority of it, then you also have a call option. After two years, you can basically unwind 
the whole trade.  The CDO, the short positions, everything.  With our other shorts, or ABX, 
there’s the mark -to-market risk. If spreads tighten, it marks against us.  And we just keep 
paying the CDS costs for maybe five to seven years until the deals pay off. 
General Partner: Wow, this market makes my head spin.  There’s so much that’s mispriced!  
This CDO equity basically has a call option on a high vol asset.  The other CDO tranches are 
short that option. Do the senior tranche buyers even know it? 
Portfolio Manager:  I don’t think so.  They buy it because they look at the ratings.  And the 
spreads are higher than on other stuff with the same ratings. They don’t speak our language. 
Correlation, vol, etc. 
General Partner: Clearly, that’s true. The guy buying the CDO’s BBB tranche? He’s just above 
our equity in terms of risk.  It’s almost the same risk if you understand how high the 
correlation is. And the CDO equity gets 25% returns, and the BBB gets L+325.  Wow. Even if 
the market falls apart, if it takes a few years, then the CDO equity could have a positive return 
and the BBB will take a bath. So the more junior tranche is actually less risky! 
Portfolio Manager: Yes. In fact, I know you’ll love this.  The next thing we’r e working on is 
trying to short the CDO tranches.  The BBB or the single A.  For exactly the reasons you just 
said. The risk is even more mispriced and concentrated than for the subprime bonds. 
General Partner: This is unbelievable. Someday, someone’s going to write a book about this. 
Let’s try to keep our positioning as quiet as possible. I don’t want to be in that book . . .  
  
391
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 2: Synthetic Subprime CDO with Hedge Fund Participation 
 
Source: Created by Yale Program on Financial Stability.  
392
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
Hedge Fund Portfolio Manager and Head Trader at Broker-Dealer’s ABS/CDO Trading 
Desk 
Phone Call Transcript (excerpt) 
April 2006 
Hedge Fund PM:  Hey, has your structuring team heard back from the CDO manager? We’d 
love to get the portfolio finalized so we can execute the trade. 
ABS/CDO Trader: I know, I know.  But you keep proposing really ugly subprime bonds, and 
they’re getting tired of rejecting them. 
Hedge Fund PM: Good. That’s the idea. If they’re so worn down and anxious to get this done, 
they should just acce pt my revised portfolio.  And by the way, I did also add a few of the 
better-quality subprime deals. I hope they appreciated that. 
ABS/CDO Trader: They did. But those also trade at tighter spreads, so it’s helpful and also not 
helpful. 
Hedge Fund PM: Well, sorry, that’s how markets work. The better stuff is more expensive! 
ABS/CDO Trader:  Thanks for explaining that to me.  I’ve only been market -making for 15 
years. 
Hedge Fund PM:  And did you ask your structuring team about the CDO bucket?  Could our 
CDO own 5% or 10% of other CDO tranches?  We’d really like to short some of those.  In 
return, we could also remove some of the other subprime bonds they hate. That should be a 
win-win. 
ABS/CDO Trader:  Structurally, it’ll work.  The rating agencies have already let a few other 
deals do this. We just need to convince our CDO manager. They didn’t love it. 
Hedge Fund PM: So, do you think they’ll eventually agree? You can be very persuasive when 
you want to be. 
ABS/CDO Trader: Thanks. That’s why I do this job.  Not for the money.  It’s really for all that 
validation from smart guys like you. OK, but seriously, I think we can make this happen, but 
there’s another condition. 
Hedge Fund PM: Of course there is. How much will it cost me? 
ABS/CDO Trader: No, it’s not like that. We’ll find a way to get this. The CDO will have maybe 
7% or 8% allocated to BBB tranches of other CDOs. But you don’t get to short all of that into 
the CDO. You need to share some with me. 
Hedge Fund PM:  You want to short some of these CDO tranches?  I thought you were just a 
market maker. 
393
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 18 ---
ABS/CDO Trader: Yes, but this isn’t really a market. You’re not the only hedge fund that wants 
to short CDO tranches. And no one wants to be long them. Well, not enough people anyway. 
And every new CDO that gets created just adds to the supply.  The last few CDOs we did, we 
couldn’t sell all of the BBBs. So guess who is the proud owner? 
Hedge Fund PM: You could sell them today if you wanted to. Just not at par. 
ABS/CDO Trader: You’d like to think so. In fact, with all the fees we earned from those CDOs, 
my basis in the BBBs is actually just 95. And guess how many bids I have there? The market 
is really thin. You want them? 
Hedge Fund PM: Funny. So you want to short those CDO tranches into our CDO? 
ABS/CDO Trader: Maybe. That would be great. But it could be different CDOs instead. They’re 
all basically the same risk, right? But I need to take half of it. If we can get $40 million of our 
CDO portfolio allocated to other CDO tranches, I get to short $20  million, and you can have 
the other half. 
Hedge Fund PM:  OK, if that gives you enough incentive to make this happen, and quickly, I 
suppose I can live with that.  
 
  
394
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
CDO Preliminary Offering Circular1
Risk Factors—Conflicts of Interest (excerpt) 
May 2006 
Initial Equityholder may enter into credit derivative transactions relating to Collateral 
Securities in the Issuer’s portfolio. On or after the Closing Date, the Initial Equityholder may 
enter into credit derivative transactions relating to a substantial portion of the Collateral 
Securities in the Issuer ’s portfolio, under which it takes a short position (fo r example, by 
buying protection under a credit default swap relating to such obligation or security) or 
otherwise hedges certain of the risks to which the Issuer is exposed. The Issuer and 
Noteholders will not receive the benefit of these transactions by the Initial Equityholder and, 
as a result of these transactions, the interests of the Initial Equityholder may not be 
consistent with those of Noteholders. 
Certain Conflicts of Interest Involving the Initial Purchaser.  The Initial Purchaser or its 
Affiliates may structure issues of Collateral Securities and arrange to place such Collateral 
Securities with the Issuer. The Initial Purchaser or an Affiliate thereof also may have acted 
as underwriter, agent, placement agent , or dealer for a significant portion o f the Collateral 
Securities. 
CDO Manager Portfolio Manager and Head of CDO Structuring at Broker-Dealer 
Phone Call Transcript (excerpt) 
May 2006 
Head of CDO Structuring: Our syndication process for your CDO is almost done.  All of the 
tranches except the BBB are oversubscribed, and that’s not far off. But the levels are a bit 
wider than we had modeled. 
CDO Manager PM: Why is that? How much wider? 
Head of CDO Structuring: Well, there’s a few reasons. The market’s been up and down lately. 
Nothing fundamental, as far as I can tell, but there are a lot of other CDOs in the market right 
now. And a big pipeline of deals that everyone wants to get into the market before summer.  
 
1 This section is sourced from the offering document of an actual (and very typical) 2006 CDO, with only minor 
edits. These paragraphs represent a very small portion of the “Risk Factors” section, which is more than 40 
pages long. The first paragraph discloses that the anonymous investor (likely a hedge fund) that is buying the 
equity tranche is also taking short positions in many of the assets owned by the CDO.  This creates potential 
conflicts of interest because this investor may have influenced the selection of those assets (although that risk 
is inadequately disclosed) and the investor may not have bought the equity tranche because the y expected it 
to perform well. 
The second paragraph discloses that other assets bought by the CDO may have been structured or 
underwritten by the dealer structuring this CDO.  Implied is that the dealer may still own those assets and 
have an incentive to sell some of those assets to the CDO. 
395
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 20 ---
We also had two investors pass on your deal. They decided that they’re not going to buy deals 
from a “first-time manager.” But they liked you and will probably buy your next one. 
CDO Manager PM: OK, but you’re still going to price it? 
Head of CDO Structuring: Yes. We have approval to take down up to $10 million of your BBBs 
if we need to.  But we’re going to price that 25  bp wider than we modeled.  The rest of the 
capital structure is close to the model. It averages to about 3–4 bp wider for the whole CDO. 
CDO Manager  PM: That’s OK, right?  You said after we price this one, you could open a 
warehouse for our next CDO. We’d really like to get started. 
Head of CDO Structuring: Yes, we’re working on getting that credit approved.  For this CDO, 
though, the extra 3–4 bp of funding cost just means that you need to get a bit more yield into 
your portfolio. I emailed you some thoughts on how you could do that. 
CDO Manager PM: You want me to buy the BBB tranche of those other CDOs. Those are deals 
you underwrote, so I assume you c ouldn’t sell them? And also swap out a few of the better 
RMBS for some riskier ones. 
Head of CDO Structuring: You’re the CDO manager, of course, and the credit decisions are 
entirely yours to make.  That’s not something we want to be involved with.  I was just 
presenting the math. There are a lot of constraints in managing a CDO, as you well know. And 
what I emailed was just a few hypothetical ideas that would make the math work.  Anything 
else you come up with, as long as the math works . . . that’s up to you. 
CDO Manager PM: Great. You say that, but then you show me a very aggressive offer on those 
bonds you want to sell me. 
Head of CDO Structuring: Sure, that’s the trading desk. He decides what price to offer it. Think 
of it as a favor. It’s a better price than you can get from any other dealer on anything similar 
in risk. He’s axed, that’s true.  He wants to sell it.  But he could’ve offered it to someone else 
too. 
CDO Manager PM: OK, fine. I’ll have my guy call him later today.  It’s just a small part of the  
overall portfolio. I really want this deal done so we can start working on the next one.  And 
listen to me, for this next one, you need to give me time to buy bonds in the market.  I don’t 
want to do this again, where we let a hedge fund short the whole portfolio. 
Head of CDO Structuring: I get it. And you’ll have more time. But everything is a trade-off, and 
everything has a cost. You got really fast execution by doing it this way. And we charged less 
too since  we didn’t have to hold your warehouse risk for two months.  Even when you’re 
doing it your way, just remember it’s still the hedge funds that drive the other side of this 
trade. 
396
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 21 ---
CDO Manager PM:  Yes, I get it.  It’ll be really nice a year from now.  I’m imagining the global 
ABS conference next year. Maybe we’ll all be hanging out at that club in Barcelona.  The one 
by the beach. The housing market will be up another 10% , and these hedge funds will want 
to get out of their money -losing shorts and move on to some thing completely different.  
Maybe I’ll buy them a few drinks and try not to gloat.   
397
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 22 ---
Glossary
2/28 ARM or 3/27 ARM Two commonly marketed types of subprime mortgage. The 
interest rate on the mortgage would be fixed for either two or 
three years (usually at a very low “teaser” rate). After that 
point, the mortgage would become an adjustable -rate 
mortgage (ARM), in which the rate would reset periodically, 
but at a higher spread above a benchmark interest rate for the 
remaining 28- or 27-year period. 
ABCP Asset-backed commercial paper.  A short -term investment 
vehicle that matures between 90 and 270 days. Typically, 
firms use ABCP to finance short -term needs. [James Chen, 
“Asset-Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP),”  Investopedia, 
updated May 12, 2020, 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/asset_backed_com
mercial_paper.asp]. 
ABS Asset-backed securities. A type of fixed -income security 
whereby a pool of assets is deposited into a special purpose 
entity, and one or more securities (often called “tranches”) are 
issued. The cash flows of those securities are backed by the 
cash flows generated by the asset pool. Typically, the assets 
are those that have stable and predictable cash flows, 
especially when pooled together so that the risks of individual 
assets are offset by the benefits of a large and diversified pool. 
The most common forms of ABS are those backed by 
mortgages (MBS, CMBS, RMBS), credit card receivables, auto 
loans, or other debt (CDOs). 
ABX Index A standardized CDS product that was created in 2006. The 
initial ABX Index comprised 25 tranches from recent 
subprime RMBS transactions.  Market participants could buy 
or sell protection on those 25 tranches with a single trade. As 
a result, ABX was highly liquid (more so than CDS on 
individual subprime tranches) and was used actively by many 
in the market to hedge risk or speculate. 
 
 Matthew A. Lieber contributed this glossary. 
398
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 23 ---
Aircraft ETC Aircraft equipment trust certificate.  A form of ABS in which 
the assets being securitized are large airplanes, typically 
under long -term leases to established airlines.  The ETC 
benefits from the predictable cash flows during the lease term 
but is exposed to risk at the end of the lease, based on renewal 
lease rates or aircraft residual values at that time.  The ETC is 
also exposed to the airlines’ credit risk. 
Alt-A A classification of residential mortgage that was used in the 
years before the GFC.  Alt-A mortgages did not satisfy the 
criteria for prime mortgages but were less risky than 
subprime. 
arb Arbitrage. CDOs are sometimes referred to as “arbitrage 
CDOs.” For a CDO to be economical to create, the sum of the 
values of each tranche must be equal to, or greater than, the 
cost of purchasing the assets to be owned by the CDO.  
Although not an arbitrage in the classical sense, when used in 
this contex t, the “CDO arb ” is meant as a shorthand for the 
relative value between the yield on the CDO assets and the 
required yield to sell the tranches. When the CDO arb is larger, 
the expected return to the equity tranche will increase, 
leading to more CDOs being created. Eventually, the increased 
supply will cause tranche yields to increase and/or drive 
down the yields of the assets.  In either case, an equilibrium 
level will be achieved. 
AUM Assets under management.  For companies that manage 
money for a fee, on behalf of clients, AUM is the primary 
measurement of size. Since most investment management fee 
arrangements are a simple percentage of AUM (hedge funds 
are the main exception), a company with more AUM will have 
proportionately higher revenue. 
399
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 24 ---
BWIC Bids wanted in “comp" (competition), also referred to as a bid 
list. A common process used by both dealers and investors to 
sell illiquid securities, such as ABS or CDO tranches. Similar to 
a traditional closed auction, a list of securities for sale is 
circulated to interested parties. At a specific time, bids can be 
submitted, and the seller will sell each bond to the highest 
bidder. Typical market practice is for the seller to disclose to 
all parties the “cover bid ” (next highest bid) but not the 
winning bid, which protects a buyer that may have overpaid 
(e.g., a “wide cover ”). If none of the bids meet the seller ’s 
“reserve” price, the bond will not trade. 
CDO Collateralized debt obligati on. A form of ABS in which the 
assets being securitized are other forms of debt.  The most 
common form of CDO is the collateralized loan obligation 
(CLO), which is backed by syndicated  loans of large, non -
investment-grade corporations.  For a few years before and 
during the GFC, there was significant issuance of CDOs backed 
by tranches of subprime RMBS, often referred to as “ABS 
CDOs” or “subprime CDOs.” 
CDO squared A less common form of CDO.  A CDO squared would own 
tranches of other CDOs. In 2007 and early 2008, CDO squareds 
were at times created as a way for dealers or other owners of 
CDO tranches to sell off some of that risk. 
CDS Credit default swap . A derivative product whereby two 
parties agree to exchange risk on a specific asset, such as a 
corporate bond, or ABS tranche, known as the “reference 
obligation.” The “protection buyer” will pay a fixed fee (the 
“CDS premium”), typically every month or quarter, to the 
“protection seller .” In the event of specific “credit events ,” 
such as a default on the reference obligation, the protection 
seller will be obligated to make a payment to the protection 
buyer or purchase the reference obligation at par.  For this 
reason, buying protection is very similar to having a short 
position, and selling protection is similar to taking a long 
position. 
400
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 25 ---
CLO  Collateralized loan obligation . A security backed by a pool of 
corporate loans, issued often by firms with low credit ratings 
or by private equity firms conducting leveraged buyouts  
[Troy Segal , “Collateralized Loan Obligation (CLO),” 
Investopedia, updated March 10, 2022, 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/clo.asp]. 
CMBS  Commercial Mortgage -backed securities. Mortgage-backed 
securities backed by commercial mortgages, e.g. , mortgages 
secured by a first lien on commercial properties, such as office 
buildings, retail properties, multifamily rental buildings, 
hotels, and industrial facilities. 
Correlation trading Dealers’ c orrelation trading desks create and sell (or buy) 
tranches of risk backed by portfolios of corporate credit (or 
ABS securities). Because they are trading only slices of the risk 
of the underlying portfolio, they need to hedge that risk using 
smaller quantities of CDS on each of the underlying credits in 
the portfolio.  The key variable in determining the proper 
hedge ratios is the correlation of default risk among and 
between the credits in the portfolio. 
CUSIP   Committee on Uniform Securities Identification Procedures. A 
unique identifying code for securities. 
DCP  Dynamic Credit Partners . A CDO manager firm founded in 
2003 by Jim Finkel and Tonko Gast. 
Delta hedging An options trading strategy aimed at reducing the risk 
associated with price movements in the underlying [James 
Chen, “Delta Hedging,” Investopedia, updated January 28, 
2021, 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/deltahedging.asp]. 
DTI  Debt-to-income ratio. An important statistic in assessing the 
credit quality of a mortgage.  Indicates the borrower’s ability 
to make the required payments on the mortgage.  Usually 
calculated as the required monthly mortgage payment 
divided by the borrower’s monthly income.  Some versions of 
DTI also add other installment debt payments (such as auto 
loan payments) to the numerator. 
401
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 26 ---
Freddie and Fannie  Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae. Formally known as the Federal 
Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (FHLMC) and the Federal National 
Mortgage Association (FNMA).  Freddie and Fannie are 
government-sponsored enterprises that support the 
mortgage and housing markets by purchasing or 
guaranteeing prime mortgages.  Most of thos e mortgages are 
then securitized into a special type of MBS, which is extremely 
liquid and trades at very tight spreads.  The majority of 
mortgages originated in the US are purchased by or 
guaranteed by Freddie and Fannie. 
GFC Global Financial Crisis. 
Hedge funds Private investment funds managed by sophisticated 
managers. Unlike mutual funds, hedge funds have wide 
latitude to invest in very risky assets, use leverage, or take 
short positions. 
HPA  Home (or house price appreciation . The aggregate change in 
house prices over a period of time. The primary index used to 
measure HPA is the Case -Shiller index, which publishes data 
at the US national level, as well as for many large metropolitan 
areas. HPA is important for mortgage credit, since the value of 
the house is the collateral securing the mortgage. 
Intex An independent analytics company that developed a system 
for monitoring and analyzing a variety of MBS and ABS 
products, including subprime RMBS and CDOs.  In the years 
before the GFC, a sign ificant number of investors in these 
products used Intex as their primary analysis tool. 
ISDA An “ISDA” is shorthand for an “ISDA Master Agreement ,” 
which is the standard document that governs all forms of 
swap agreements, including CDS. 
LTV  Loan-to-value ratio . An important statistic in assessing the 
credit quality of a mortgage.  Indicates how much equity the 
homeowner has in the property. 
MBS  Mortgage-backed securities. A general term for ABS in which 
a pool of mortgages is securitized. 
402
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 27 ---
NAIC  National Association of Insurance Commissioners . The NAIC 
sets rules for how much regulatory capital, or reserves, 
insurance companies are required to hold against assets in 
their general account. Previously, the required amounts were 
generally based on the asset’s rating from a rating agency such 
as Moody’s or S&P. 
Negative basis trade A trade in which a bond or ABS tranche is purchased and then 
the owner also uses a CDS to buy protection on that same 
bond or tranche. If the spread on the bond is higher than the 
cost of the CDS protection, the owner will earn the net 
difference. Although counterintuitive, this is referred to as a 
“negative basis” (for most corporate bonds, the bond spread 
is usually lower than the CDS spread, which is a positive 
basis). Regulated banks and insurance companies often 
executed this tr ade by buying AAA CDO tranches and then 
buying protection using CDS (or sometimes an insurance 
policy) from a monoline insurer.  The risk was deemed to be 
zero, so the regulatory capital requirements was also zero. 
New Century A large subprime mortgage ori gination company.  It was the 
first significant company of this kind to file for bankruptcy, in 
April 2007, an event that is considered one of the primary 
turning points for the subprime market. 
Notional (value) A number referenced in swap agreements to be used as the 
basis for calculations of the payments to be made under the 
swap. For example, in the case of a credit default swap, if the 
notional is $5 million, and the premium is 2%, then the 
protection buyer will pay $100,000 per year to the protection 
seller ($5  million x 2%). If a loss event occurs on the 
underlying reference security, then the protection buyer will 
receive payments equal to the losses that would  have been 
realized had they owned $5 million of that reference security. 
403
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 28 ---
NRSRO Nationally recognized statistical rating organization.  The 
2006 Credit Rating Agency Reform Act formalized US 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) oversight of the 
industry in an effort to ensure that only qualified firms that 
had been approved by the agency as NRSROs were issuing 
ratings for financial instruments and entities that were being 
relied on by investors. The 2010 Dodd -Frank Act  expanded 
the SEC’s oversight authority  and pushed regulators, which 
had also relied on ratings in j udging a bank’s risk level, to 
develop alternative measures of creditworthiness, 
introducing the “investment -grade” label. Institutional 
investors remain a key end -user of the NRSRO ratings. 
Currently, nine firms are registered as NRSROs; however, 
Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s have dominated the industry, 
responsible for more than 80% of ratings across all asset 
classes in 2018. 
OTM  Out of the money. A term used to describe an option in which 
the underlying security is less or more than the strike price, in 
the case of a call or put, respectively. The owner of an out of 
the money option will not elect to exercise that option. The 
opposite would be “ITM,” or in the money, in which case the 
option would be exercised profitably by the owner. When the 
underlying security is trading at the strike price, the option is 
“ATM,” or at the money. 
OWIC  Offers wanted in “comp” (competition) . Similar to a BWIC. 
When used in the context of the CDS market, “offers” means 
offers of protection. Offering protection, or selling protection, 
is comparable to buying a bond, as both are a long risk 
position. In the years prior to the GFC, hedge funds that 
wanted to short specific subprime tranches conducted OWICs. 
CDO managers often used these OWICs to ramp up synthetic 
CDOs. In this case, the winning offer would be the one at the 
lowest CDS premium. 
Pool strats  Pool stratifications. Tables commonly found in the marketing 
materials for RMBS and other asset -backed securities. These 
tables show how various important characteristics of the 
underlying mortgages are distributed within the pool. For 
example, an RMBS may have thousands of loans, each with a 
different LTV; the pool strats might include a table showi ng 
the distribution of LTVs within the pool. 
404
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 29 ---
Repo Repurchase agreement. A short-term financing arrangement 
for liquid securities.  The security owner sells the security to 
the counterparty and simultaneously agrees to repurchase it 
on a specific day and at  a specific price (based on an implied 
interest rate, the “repo rate”). Most repos mature the next day 
and roll over day to day until terminated by one party. 
RMBS  Residential M ortgage-backed securities . Mortgage-backed 
securities backed by residential m ortgages, e.g. , mortgages 
secured by a first lien on single -family houses.  Some RMBS 
pools entirely comprised prime quality mortgages, and this 
remains true today.  Before the GFC, separate RMBS pools 
were created that used only subprime mortgages. 
RTC  Resolution Trust Corp . A quasi -governmental entity 
established by the US federal government in 1989 to help 
resolve the savings and loan crisis by managing failed banks, 
S&Ls, and thrifts, and disposing of loans on their balance 
sheets. One of the most efficient tools was to securitize 
commercial m ortgages; this process helped spur the 
development of the then-nascent CMBS industry. 
SIV  Structured investment vehicle. SIVs were entities used by 
large banks to move highly rated, lower yielding assets off of 
their balance sheets.  This made the banks appear to be less 
leveraged than  they were . Although the SIVs were legally 
separate entities from the sponsoring banks, they were 
funded with short-term commercial paper (CP). If the SIV was 
unable to roll the CP at a low enough interest rate, the 
sponsoring bank was legally obligated, via a “liquidity put,” to 
purchase the CP themselves.  This occurred at some banks in 
2008. 
SPAC  Special purpose acquisition company. A company with no 
commercial operations formed to raise capital for acquiring 
or merging with an existing company [Julie Young, “Special 
Purpose Acquisition Company (SPAC),” Investopedia, 
updated March 14, 2022, 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/spac.asp]. 
405
Anatomy of a Trade Kasoff

--- Page 30 ---
SPV  Special purpose vehicle. An SPV is the legal entity that issues 
an RMBS (or a CDO or other type of asset -backed security). It 
is a corporation or trust that is created at the time of issuance. 
It will own the underlying pool of mortgages or other assets, 
and it will issue the tranches that are backed by the cash flows 
from those assets. The entity will be legally limited to that sole 
purpose, and it may not conduct other business, acquire other 
assets, or issue additional debt or equity. 
“Super seniors” In some CDOs (and other types of ABS), there would be two 
AAA tranches, one of which was senior to the other.  They 
would be referred to as the “super senior” and the “junior 
AAA.” Super seniors were deemed to be extremely low risk, 
and most buyers essentially treated them as risk-free. 
TABX index Tranched ABX. Each ABX index represents the risk of a 
portfolio of subprime RMBS tranches, whereas TABX 
represented slices of the risk of that subprime RMBS portfolio. 
For example, a “10 –20” TABX tranche bore losses only after 
the ABX index sustained a 10% loss an d lost its entire value 
when the ABX index had sustained a 20% loss. So , a TABX 
tranche had a risk profile similar to a tranche of a subprime 
CDO. 
Tranche A security issued by any type of ABS.  Most ABS structures 
have many tranches.  Each tranche of an ABS  will have a 
different level of seniority. When losses occur within the ABS 
asset pool, the most junior tranche will absorb those losses 
first, while more senior tranches will be paid off in full.  The 
varying levels of risk and seniority allow more senior tranches 
to be rated at higher levels (with the most senior tranche often 
rated AAA).  Conversely, the yield promised to more senior 
tranches will be lower. 
 
406
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1