--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Christopher Spoth Lessons Learned: Christopher Spoth 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2022) "Lessons Learned: Christopher Spoth," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 
222-223. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1433 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/15 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/15

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Christopher Spoth 
By Sandra Ward  
As senior deputy director of the Division of Supervision and Consumer Protection at the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Spoth led examinations, enforcement actions, problem 
bank remediations, and failure resolutions, among a range of responsibilities. During the Global 
Financial Crisis, he was on the front lines of fast -moving policy discussions and actions to help 
stabilize the  financial system , and he oversaw the closure and restructuring of some of the 
nation’s largest banks. This abstract is based on an interview with Spoth on February 4, 2021; 
the full transcript may be accessed here. 
Keep current: Assessing risk in real time helps the supervisory response.    
As stresses in the s ubprime mortgage market surfaced in 2007 and triggered discussions 
about possible systemic impact on the financial system and economy, top FDIC officials 
began a review of the agency’s supervisory program. Spoth recalled,  
It was clear that the supervisory  process of regular annual examinations and other 
activities would be insufficient , because the information provided by those sources 
would be stale in a fast-paced crisis and similarly would provide insufficient tools to 
initiate the regulatory corrective actions that would be needed.  
At the time, based on previously collected data, many of the banks and thrifts that would 
ultimately be deemed problematic were identified as performing strongly, Spoth note d. It 
became essential to access information that r eflected current conditions in  order to 
accurately determine the vitality of an institution. He said, 
Ratings drive corrective programs, including demands to raise capital liquidity, 
change management, restrict growth, and broker deposits. All those sorts of things 
are driven by what you can know about institutions or characteristics of groups of 
institutions. Importantly, current information provides the supervisory data needed 
to make accurate assessments of the industry in aggregate, thereby enabling pol icy 
makers and the legislature to take well-informed action. 
Don’t delay: Quicker response times are more likely to lead to better outcomes. 
The crisis unfolded quickly , and it was challenging for regulators to keep pace with 
developments and achieve conse nsus on actions to take. In many cases, interagency and 
intra-agency conversations proved productive , and a course of action could be agreed on. 
Yet, particularly in conversations about larger banks, agreement was harder to come by. 
Spoth recalled,  
We had our own challenges at the FDIC. I was talking about downgrading institutions 
in a timely manner and taking corrective actions. Those are hard actions to take. . . .  
222

--- Page 4 ---
There were some interagency challenges that I would just characterize as unfortunate 
conversations going back and forth. One of the challenges to supervision is that you 
don’t want to be too slow to respond , because unnecessary delay can make it more 
difficult to raise capital, change management, or sell an institution. It might not be 
possible to achieve those actions in some cases, but if you don’t try early enough , it 
becomes progressively harder to do so. 
Nonbanks continue to present real risks to financial system stability. 
The Global Financial Crisis showed how interconnected the financial markets had  become, 
and it exposed the increasing role of nonbanks in financial intermediation . The fragility of 
nonbank business models in a liquidity crunch , highlighted by the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers, is by now well  known. What was unclear in the crisis and remains unclear, said 
Spoth, is the level of supervision over to nonbanks. That could be a problem, especially 
because nonbanks are now the dominant players in areas such as t he mortgage business. 
Spoth said, 
Take as an example that most mortgage servicing is conducted by nonbanks. The 
states are addressing this issue, but I don’t know if it is solved from a stability 
standpoint. There were also lessons learned about the money market funds breaking 
the buck under s tress, but I am not sure that is solved. Problems arose in both 
mortgage ser vicing and money market funds when the coronavirus pandemic 
erupted. 
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-34 
Copyright © Yale University. 
 
223
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3