--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Veerathai Santiprabhob Lessons Learned: Veerathai Santiprabhob 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Haggerty, Maryann (2022) "Lessons Learned: Veerathai Santiprabhob," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : 
Iss. 4, 637-639. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1472 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/36 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss4/36

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Veerathai Santiprabhob 
By Maryann Haggerty 
Veerathai Santiprabhob was the governor of the Bank of Thailand from 2015 to 2020, a period 
that included the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Earlier in his career, he was an economist 
at the International Monetary Fund. At the time of the 1997 –1998 Asian Financial Crisis, he 
returned to  his home  country to take a position at the Ministry of Finance. There, he was 
involved with the government response to that financial crisis. From 2000 to 2015, he held 
private-sector finance jobs before going to lead the Bank of Thailand.  This Lessons Learned is 
based on an interview with Santiprabhob in October 2021 ; the full transcript can be accessed 
here. 
During a crisis, it is critical that the central bank have good data. 
Without good data, planning for and reacting to crises are both hobbled, Santiprabhob said. 
He explained, 
When we entered the 1997 financial crisis, key data were not there. So , we could not 
accurately diagnose the problems and prescribe what needed to be done in a timely 
manner. Thus , the first thing is to ensure that we have good and comprehensive 
information on the health of the financial system. And it has to be detailed information 
bank by bank and go deep into different types of businesses that they are involved 
with. 
I’ll give you an example . During the 1997 financial crisis , some of the reporting 
standards that we used were not up to the international standards. For instance, 
classifications of nonperforming loans [NPLs] were based on 12-month nonpayment, 
while international standards for nonperforming loans were based on three -month 
nonpayment. When the crisis hit, everyone thought that the banks were in fine shape, 
but indeed, they were not. The true size of the NPLs was much larger than what we 
had thought before. Therefore, when planning for a crisis, it's very important that we 
look at all the possible data that could indicate the true health of financial institutions. 
When doing crisis planning, think about chain effects; contagion is a material risk. 
Crisis planning requires thinking about “chain effects,” Santiprabhob cautioned, considering 
“how problems of one bank or one financial institution could lead to the others and spread 
to the financial system at large.” He said: 
We have a slogan at the Bank of Thailand when we think of these issues: Detect the 
smoke quickly, put out the fire as quickly as we can, and stop the fire from spreading. 
Therefore, we always ask these questions when we do crisis planning . How can we 
detect the smoke  quickly? How can we put out the fire , and how can we ring -fence 
that so that it won’t spread through the network? 
637

--- Page 4 ---
Both planning and data collection need to look beyond banks, he emphasized. Problems may 
begin outside banks, as they did in the Global Financial Crisis. He pointed to the nonbank 
financial activities of big banks , which were common in Thailand , where banks also sell 
mutual fund and insurance products to their  deposit customers. Central bankers must be 
aware of the activities of large nonfinancial corporations, which can have systemic impacts 
as borrowers. 
According to Santiprabhob, t he impacts of t echnology also require attention  in crisis 
planning: “I’m not t alking only about cybersecurity risks—but think of how  new types of 
crypto assets and financial transactions based on smart contracts and blockchain could have 
implications for the financial system during normal time and crisis time. ” He believes that 
good visibility and understanding of modern financial technology is critical not just because 
of cybersecurity concerns, but also because of the role of technologies such as payment 
systems. 
During a crisis, c redible public disclosure is key to enhance the crisis response and 
reinforce the central bank’s independence. 
In 1997, Santiprabhob said, credible communication with the public was needed to prevent 
panic from escalating, but insufficient data complicated the situation. He explained,  
The problem at th at time was the inability of the public to differentiate between 
insolvent and solvent finance companies. Obviously, during a panic , there were 
thousands of rumors. But then it was also very difficult for the authorities to 
differentiate between the solvent and insolvent ones, because the situation was very 
fluid. When there was a severe shortage of liquidity, interest rates went up very high. 
Financial institutions started to hoard th eir liquidity, not lending to other financial 
institutions. Then good finance companies that had a severe liquidity shortage could 
also become insolvent.  
And this is related to the point that I made early on about the importance of data. We 
didn’t have proper data on the true health of the financial system. And we had not 
disclosed them on a regular basis before the crisis. So, by disclosing sensitive data 
during a crisis, it could trigger even more panic. But it would not be possible to build 
public confidence without disclosing important data. . . . The authority had to weigh  
very carefully what to disclose, how to disclose , and what would be the outcome of 
the disclosure. It’s not disclosing information alone ; we had to disclose information 
together with  supportive measures, the necessary measures t hat would calm the 
market and address the true questions in the minds of the public. 
In a time of crisis, what’s important is “ communication on the measures that authorities 
would like to implement, the rationales of these measures, the expected outcomes , and 
whether these measures have met the objectives,” he said. Another thing to be clear about is 
the health of banks and financial institutions. Santiprabhob explained that in a crisis , no one 
wanted to see a bank or financial institution fail, but, he cautioned,  “If there is a problem in 
638
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
the financial system leading to a crisis, there is no way that we can help every financial 
institution.” 
One thing that I learned from the different crises is that we need to separate the good 
ones [financial institutions] from the not so good ones right from the beginning with 
very clear criteria. And that’s how the authorities can establish credibility in the eyes 
of the public. 
The central bank must be seen as professional, not political. 
Financial system regulators and central bankers mu st work with a nation’s fiscal and 
political authorities in times of financial crisis, Santiprabhob said, because those authorities 
control resources. At the same time, regulators must maintain professional independence. 
When a crisis gets enlarged, when y ou have to do large -scale financial sector 
restructuring with someone providing financial backstop, or when you need to 
change or amend certain laws to address a financial crisis like announcing a blanket 
deposit guarantee, obviously you have to bring in t he fiscal authorities  and the 
government. From the outset of a financial  crisis, we need to keep the government  
informed of our analysis and measures.  What needs to be seen  by the public is that 
these measures are based on professionalism of the regulators  without political 
interference.  
One thing that I learned from my times  as the governor, when I had to deal with 
turmoil in money markets and mutual funds, is that I had to emphasize to the public 
and politicians that our measures were proposed purely by the central bank. It was 
important to take away the perceptions that the central bank  might have been 
ordered or requested by the government to come up with special facilities to help 
certain companies or certain groups of investors. 
Dated: December 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021–24 
 
639
Lessons Learned: Veerathai Santiprabhob Haggerty