--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Simon Potter Lessons Learned: Simon Potter 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Haggerty, Maryann (2022) "Lessons Learned: Simon Potter," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 
212-215. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1430 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/12 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/12

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Simon Potter 
By Maryann Haggerty 
Simon Potter, an economist, worked at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for more than 
two decades. Leading up to the Global Financial Crisis , he was the New York Fed ’s associate 
director of economic research; in 2010 , he became director. In 2012, he shi fted to become the 
head of the markets group, putting him at the helm of the Fed ’s open markets operations, the 
mechanism by which the central bank steers monetary policy and interest rates. He moved to 
the private sector in 2019. For this April 2021 Lesso ns Learned interview, he emphasized that 
these are his personal opinions , based on his former roles at the Fed and not on any current 
position. The full transcript may be accessed here.  
Simon Potter’s work at the New York Fed involved both economics research and public 
policy. As an economist, he has spoken and written about lessons from his profession’s  
successes and failures in the period leading up to the 2007 –2009 Global Financial Crisis. In 
this Lessons Learned interview, he also elaborated on takeaways for central bankers from 
the crisis period and the period afterward. 
In a crisis, challenge your assumptions. 
In 2007 and early 2008, the assumption that banks had enough capital had not been 
sufficiently tested. “We all underestimated, I think, how big the shock was,” Potter said. “One 
of the basic fallacies that had been around for quite some time was  the banks had sufficient 
capital, and that hadn’t really been tested.” Timothy Geithner, then president of the New York 
Fed, “kept on asking questions, do banks have en ough capital?” The bank supervisors 
maintained that banks did. As Potter recalled, 
So, if you’re a supervisor and you ’ve been saying, “The firm I’m supervising is really 
strong,” then what do you do? Do you double down or not? I remember looking at a 
stress test, because we were trying to integrate different views more, and this was an 
example of these different reactions. I looked at the stress test and said, “How come 
this big bank is not bankrupt? ” And the person said to me, “Well, in the way that the 
bank models the stress, when a borrower doesn’t make a loan payment, you get fees.” 
Because there were late payment fees, and that generates lots of revenue. Which was 
true as long as there wasn’t a big shock. 
But 2008 brought very big  shocks, spreading from the housing market. In some modeling, 
Potter said, “You could see clearly that . . . the chance that [some banks] would survive even 
a moderate recession was very low, because they were so exposed to the housing.” Troubles 
moved through the financial system. He noted: 
The problem that happened is this assumption that the banks had enough capital, and 
by banks I mean the rest of the system, not the big investment banks. That started to 
be questioned by Washington Mutual, which wasn ’t a surprise. So , Washington 
212

--- Page 4 ---
Mutual, in the simulations we’d done, was failing 99 out of 100 times. Unfortunately, 
it was so big that it took the FDIC time to staff up, and they surprisingly closed out on 
the Thursday. And you don ’t want to close a bank on a  Thursday, with lines outside. 
So that was in September; then there was Wachovia, also failed, or was close to failing. 
. . .  Now, the information you would have , given the better data collection that ’s 
available, would have told you how vulnerable Wachovia was. Wachovia’s issue was 
partly the accounting measures we were using didn’t capture how weak it was. 
Crisis calls for action, not academic debate. 
“The New York Fed was involved during the crisis partly because the skill that you required 
in the instant of that battle was mainly at the New York Fed,” Potter said. What was that skill? 
“How to do the hand -to-hand combat during the crisis” —that is, to work with connections 
with markets and institutions. He said: 
Having an academic debate and doing it over many weeks is not particularly helpful 
when the financial system is about to tip over. . . . There was a Minneapolis Fed paper, 
Staff Working Paper 666, which got changed a lot, but it basically said nothing was 
wrong, because they had no idea which data to look at, because they hadn ’t been 
involved in it, because they didn’t think it was important.  
So, the first thing is, don ’t listen to people who haven ’t been involved in the debate , 
because it’s going to take them a long time to catch up. 
. . . I think it’s important to have people who have been involved in chaotic situations 
before. So, the New York Fed had this guy, Terry Checki,1 who had been involved in a 
lot of emerging market crises, and he was aware that it would feel quite scary at times. 
The institution as a whole did react very well, I think, because of the connection with 
markets and the supervised firms. The structure was flat in sort of many ways. People 
were tasked with things and had quite a lot of discretion , and it was very interactive 
and very intense. People were sleeping in the buildings, sleeping in hotels for quite a 
few weeks. Certainly, it was 24/7 for about four weeks , from Lehman to the Capital 
Purchase Program. 
In a crisis, the lack of information and the changing circu mstance may compel 
innovation if the rescue is to succeed.  
Potter discussed how the Fed innovated a number of times during the crisis, designing new 
programs to address fast-developing problems. Even though some Fed officials thought that 
some of the old -style solutions would still work (could you get a deal for someone to buy 
Lehman Brothers?), as early as spring 2008 , after Bear Stearns, said Potter, “ there was an 
attempt, it was very good,  to get people just looking at the problems, asking different 
 
1 Executive vice president and head of the Emerging Markets and International Affairs Group of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York before his retirement in 2014. 
213
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
questions, coming up with different solutions.” As the crisis persisted, innovation increased, 
Potter explained: 
Then there was a lot of innovation, I think, in terms of how to arrest the panic. One 
change was making the facilities much bigger. So, the day af ter the capital was given 
to the banks, [former Fed chair] Bernanke agreed to take the caps off the foreign 
exchange swaps, and they blew out to close to $600 billion. So size is pretty important. 
If you can do something in size and people believe there ’s a backstop, then that can 
calm things down. We saw this in March and April [2020], even before some of the 
money was actually available last year, there was a calming effect.  
But a lot of what worked [in 2008–2009] was the FDIC guarantee and cash inject ion 
into the banks. There it was more of a combined effort across all the agencies that the 
US has. 
He also counts the Commercial Paper Funding Facility  and the Asset-Backed Commercial 
Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility as successful creative programs. “Many 
of the facilities at first were just designed to prevent the panic from getting worse ,” said 
Potter. Thankfully, many worked.  
Rapid operational readiness is key in a crisis, and practice helps this happen. 
Open market operations like those at the New York Fed don’t happen automatically. They 
require planning and practice, Potter said. “If you’re in charge of the operation and you screw 
up, you have all the downside risk. Whereas the people who might be in control of w hether 
you’re allowed to practice, they don ’t have that downside risk because people can ’t see 
them.” 
More preparation would have helped the March 2020 Federal Reserve response to the 
COVID-19-linked financial system panic, he said.  
Let’s go back to March 23rd [2020] when the Fed announced all of the new facilities, 
the really creative ones. They’d had a week before that which looked incredibly messy 
if you're an insider, but from the outside you probably can ’t tell. After the 
announcement, only two of tho se programs, the one for the money funds and the 
Primary Dealer Credit Facility, were up and running. It took the others a while to 
become operational. Particularly, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, that took a 
long time. You don ’t want there to be a  gap like that between announcement and 
availability. Ideally, you ’d like to be operationally ready at the point that you 
announce. I did a Peterson post2 on this topic of logistics. 
 
2 Simon Potter. 2020. “Central Bank Lending Logistics in the War on COVID -19: A Primer.” Peterson Institute 
for International Economics blogpost, April 17, 2020.   
https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/central-bank-lending-logistics-war-covid-19-
primer 
214
Lessons Learned: Simon Potter Haggerty

--- Page 6 ---
Practicing in advance of a crisis means that the response should go more smoothly when it’s 
needed, Potter said. Systems are more complicated now , and so, he emphasized  that 
rehearsing all the different elements of potential programs is more important than ever. He 
recalled visiting a Fed COVID website t hat “was a disaster because they hadn’t had the user 
acceptance testing.” You don’t want that to happen, Potter said: “You don’t want to tell people 
that an institution failed because the Fed failed to send them cash,” or because it went to the 
wrong place.  
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-16 
Copyright © Yale University. 
 
215
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3