--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Wall Street’s Subprime Debacle: Firsthand Accounts from Inside Wall Street’s Subprime Debacle: Firsthand Accounts from Inside 
the CDO Machine the CDO Machine 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Steven H. Kasoff 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. and Kasoff, Steven H. (2022) "Wall Street’s Subprime Debacle: Firsthand Accounts 
from Inside the CDO Machine," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 371-378. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1267 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/11 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/11

--- Page 3 ---
Wall Street’s Subprime Debacle: 
Firsthand Accounts from Inside the CDO Machine* 
Matthew A. Lieber† and Steven H. Kasoff‡ 
The primary catalyst that triggered the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2007 –09 was the 
market for subprime mortgage securities in the US. The engine driving the subprime surge, 
collateralized debt obligations —CDOs—have been much cited but less well understood. 
Using new securitization and derivative products, along with unprecedented leverage, CDOs 
enabled dealers and investors to multiply and concentrate subprime risk to the point that it 
became a systemic threat. This market grew rapidly during the years preceding the crisis, 
fueled by aggressive (and often fraudulent) mortgage loan underwr iting, unrealistic 
expectations for continued growth in home prices, and highly levered institutions with 
access to artificially low interest rates. 
The observations, perceptions, and actions of participants in the subprime markets remain 
poorly documented  and incompletely understood. Seeking to deepen our understanding, 
this study has produced seven interview summaries and one article telling the story of a 
hypothetical CDO deal. 
This article is organized in four parts. First, it presents our research questions and methods 
in relation to the existing knowledge on the topic. Second, it describes what we think are the 
study’s main contributions. Third, it previews the Lessons Learned summaries and 
interviews from each of the participants. And last, it identif ies what we believe are some of 
the unique values from the project. 
1. Research Questions, Existing Knowledge, and Our Methods 
The aims of this study are to document and probe the mix of economic assumptions, 
investment strategies, and incentives at work—and to test the validity of certain well -
established narratives. We interviewed a set of individual market participants —financial 
engineers, marketers, executives, analysts, and investors —who collectively made up “the 
CDO machine.” In one-to-two-hour-long interviews, we asked them about their experiences 
at the forefront of CDO markets in relation to the following questions: 
• How did the novel capabilities unleashed by the CDO markets interact with the 
strategic mindsets and operational thinking inside Wall Street dealer firms?
 
* This article is part of a special project of the Yale Program on Financial Stability Lessons Learned Oral History 
Project: Inside the CDO Machine, which can be accessed at our website here,  
https://som.yale.edu/centers/program-on-financial-stability/lessons-learned-oral-history-project. 
† Interviewer, Yale Program on Financial Stability Lessons Learned Oral History Project.  
‡ Yale School of Management Fellow and former equity partner and head of real estate and structured products 
investments at the Elliott Management Corp., a global hedge fund.  
371

--- Page 4 ---
• What motivated hedge funds and other investors to short subprime securities? And 
how did their thinking and actions evolve from 2004 to 2008? 
• Were the buyers of CDOs naive? What made CDOs so appealing to them? 
• Why were the rating agencies incapable of accurately assessing the risk of CDOs? 
• What led Wall Street dealers to shift from producing CDOs for sale to taking risk 
positions in them? 
Research involving the subprime collapse has tended to follow one of two tracks. On the one 
hand, scholars and policy experts investigating the financial crisis have focused on 
institutional factors such as excessive leverage, regulatory fragmentation, and a vulnerable 
shadow banking regime.1 
These structural accou nts identify the subprime debacle as the trigger of a larger financial 
crisis that was driven by multiple causes. 2 Not surprisingly, multistranded explanations 
replete with impersonal, and often arcane, causes are hard for even the most informed 
observers to digest and disseminate. 
On the other hand, narrative treatments of the subprime CDO markets featuring human-level 
accounts have reached a wider audience. In these works, journalists and filmmakers tell 
compelling stories and provide more salient, monocausal explanations. 3 Their narrative 
accounts offer vivid human color and suspense, with a seductive Wall Street v illain lurking 
at any turn. The adaptation of these works to film was natural, appropriate, and broadly 
influential.4 
 
1 Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC), The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report  (Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office, 2011) [URL: https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/financial-crisis-inquiry-commission-0]. 
See also Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick, “The Financial Crisis of 2007 –2009,” in Routledge Handbook of 
Major Events in Economic History, eds. Robert Whaples and Randall Parker  (Abingdon: Routledge, 2013) 
[URL: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2003388]. 
2 FCIC Report 2011, and Frederic S. Mishkin, “Over the Cliff: From the Subprime to the Global Financial Crisis,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, no. 1 (2011): 49–70. 
3 Two important books are Michael Lewis, The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine  (New York: W.W. 
Norton, 2011) and Gregory Zuckerman, The Greatest Trade Ever: The Behind -the-Scenes Story of How John 
Paulson Defied Wall Street and Made Financial History (New York: Broadway Business, 2009). Andrew Ross 
Sorkin’s Too Big to Fail: The Inside Story of How Wall Street and Washington Fought to Save the Financial 
System (New York: Penguin Books, 2010) also reports on CDO markets within the urgent crisis dealings of big 
bank CEOs and Washington leaders. 
4 The film The Big Short  (directed by Adam McKay, Paramount Pictures, 2015, 130 minutes) grossed 
$133 million worldwide. Margin Cal l (J.C. Chandor, Lionsgate, 2011, 109 minutes) is a critically acclaimed 
thriller inspired by Lehman Brothers. Inside Job (Charles Ferguson, Sony Pictures Classics, 2010, 108 minutes) 
won the 2010 Academy Award for Best Documentary. The film Too Big to Fai l (Curtis Hanson, HBO Films, 
2011, 98 minutes), based on the Sorkin book, featured William Hurt as Hank Paulson and Paul Giamatti as 
Ben Bernanke and earned 10 Emmy award nominations. 
372
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Analytically, the methods involved in the narrative recountings have a number of issues. 
Beginning with the raw material, first person ac counts of key market actors can be difficult 
to access and assemble. They are time-consuming (if not impossible) to collect, and they are 
one-sided by definition. The statements can be unreliable if the human source is motivated 
to embellish or obfuscate. Moving along, creating a narrative from the anecdotal data —the 
journalist’s art—is another major step. Packaging these narratives into a book with an arc 
and then dramatizing the book into a gripping film are third and fourth levels of art. For the 
reporting that they do and the powerful narratives that they create, these books and films 
have contributed a good deal to public and elite understanding of the financial crisis. And 
then they stopped, around 2011. No one wanted to read the story anymore. 
Not sur prisingly, much of the storytelling in the narrative treatments of the crisis (and 
particularly in the subprime CDO markets) paints an unrealistic, binary picture in which 
some people were fools and others had perfect knowledge and vision. What 
misunderstandings the narrative works have created and popularized is an open question. 
Thus, the key focus in our interviews has been on the omissions in both strands of the 
literature: 
• What important details and events did the writers cut from the books and the fil ms 
because they were too arcane, too messy, or morally ambiguous? 
• What did market actors know, see, experience, or later realize? And how does their 
intelligence square or not with institutional knowledge from the more academic 
accounts?  
One other factor limiting the popular works is their timing. Concentrated around 2010, the 
books and films lack the perspective and knowledge available to us and our interviewees in 
2021. For example, the popular works tend to lump together the subprime debacle and the 
GFC, even though it is not obvious why the subprime bust spread as widely as it did.5 
Why and how did a small amount of subprime mortgages trigger a systemic financial crisis? 
As we now know, 6 the permissive stance of regulators, rating agencies, and centra l banks 
created the conditions in which the largest, most globally integrated Wall Street dealer firms 
used derivatives to recklessly amass excessive leverage. Multiple weak spots together made 
the system vulnerable in a big way. The subprime CDO bust was an intervening event, related 
to the systemic vulnerability in multiple ways. Yet, the predominant person-based narratives 
turn the CDO business into a monolithic Wall Street actor and the main cause of the GFC. The 
linkage between subprime markets and the Global Financial Crisis goes beyond such extant 
 
5 Gary Gorton, “The Big Short Shrift,” review of The Big Short and The Greatest Trade Ever, Journal of Economic 
Literature 49, no. 2 (June 2011) [URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1768032 ]. 
Gorton criticizes the books by Lewis  and Zuckerman for the limits of their economic vision and the absence 
of a larger explanation. 
6 See Larry Cordell, Greg Feldberg, and Danielle Sass, “The Role of ABS CDOs in the Financial Crisis,” Journal of 
Structured Finance 25, no. 2 (Summer 2019): 10–27. [URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3443043]. See 
also FCIC Report 2011, Mishkin 2011, and Gorton and Metrick 2013. 
373
Wall Street’s Subprime Debacle Lieber and Kasoff

--- Page 6 ---
CDO machine -based popular explanations. “There is no substitute for digging into the 
workings of the financial machine,” as Adam Tooze writes, for it is “there we will find both 
the mechanism that tore the w orld apart and the reason why that disintegration came as 
such a surprise.”7 The findings from the interviews help us understand what went wrong. 
2. A Deeper Understanding 
This study contributes in three ways toward a richer, more accurate understanding of the 
mindsets and incentives at work in the subprime CDO machine. First, by interviewing 
financial industry professionals who were leading players in the market at the time, it offers 
a valuable window into the mindset of market participant s. With their firsthand knowledge 
of the CDO machine, market participants bring a perspective and intelligence that are distinct 
from those of regulators, analysts, or scholars. The legal and reputational concerns that they 
have as financial industry leaders, however, often make it difficult if not impossible to access 
their views in detail as this study has done. By collecting input from seven actors across the 
industry, the study offers a sampling of market thinking and a more balanced picture than 
reports focusing on one person or institution. The interviewees represent a cross section of 
the industry. They include voices from the structuring units, institutional sales, executive 
ranks, the buy side, a rating agency, and hedge funds; represented are investors taking both 
short and long positions. 
Second, the collection summarizes the most important lessons learned from each of its 
interviewees and highlights distinctive perspectives of each. The insights from the human 
source narratives have been enriched from hindsight. The intervening years have allowed 
the interviewees to reflect on the period and to incorporate the latest knowledge of the 
financial crisis, including, for example, the relationship between the subprime boom and the 
GFC. 
Third, in the “ Anatomy of a Trade : The Making of a Subprime CDO” article, the collection 
presents an integrated snapshot —in fictionalized form —of the CDO machine and how it 
worked. The reader will recognize the patterns identified in the summaries. The Anatomy of 
a Trade article integrates the different perspectives in the form of one hypothetical deal, 
sketching for the reader how the various pieces and agents involved in this one trade fit 
together. 
Considering the interviews as a unit, a number of common themes emerge. Fi rst, there was 
enormous complexity and uncertainty about the direction of the market, even as it began to 
unravel in 2007. Second, in their own way, each participant spotted warning signs well 
before the crisis hit. Simultaneously, it made sense for each —industry norms and market 
forces exerted pressure on them—to continue to support the production of CDOs in greater 
volumes and further on the timeline than they otherwise might have. Third, the application 
of financial models developed for conventional cred it instruments to housing -backed 
 
7 Adam Tooze, Crashed: How a Decade of Financial Crises Changed the World (London: Penguin Books, 2018), 
22. 
374
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
securities was mistaken, but this mistake was murky at the time (and it remains so). The 
rating agencies, under new financial pressure, played a key role as gatekeeper sanctioning 
subprime CDO investments. Fourth, an overwh elming force that all actors testify to is the 
remarkable demand for higher -yield credit at the time. Meanwhile, fifth, the regulatory 
regime enabled large institutions to leverage positions on highly rated CDOs without limit. 
Sixth, the regulatory authori ties allowed institutions to invent and operate a subprime 
market without reliable guardrails. Seventh, excessive leverage at banks was becoming a 
systemic flaw. Large financial institutions made many large mistakes, though they varied in 
their capability to correct, absorb, and recover from them. Eighth, large mistakes became 
massive and systemically destructive only within those institutions that had thrown off the 
controls and removed risk management tasks and responsibilities from their operational 
units. 
By sharing with us their recollections and their keenest lessons learned over the ensuing 
decade, our interviewees provide accounts that help us put together the pieces of the 
systemic debacle. These market participants explain in detail a number of ways that the CDO 
market failed to function. Crucial to their testimonials, however, is the dilemma of localized 
market intelligence and tunnel vision. While each participant recognized certain warning 
signs during 2007 –08, at the time, none of them could ent irely see the broader picture of 
dysfunction. Each was wrapped up in a subsection of the CDO market, a midlevel operator 
or a rising executive, unable or unwilling to see the big picture. Describing a kind of financial 
“fog of war,” their accounts reveal h uman and institutional elements of uncertainty, career 
hierarchies, and personal interactions within the CDO market that influenced their actions. 
3. Highlights from the Individual Interviewees 
The following summaries and the full interviews give voice to a v ariety of individual 
experiences and takeaways, which we summarize here. 
Kicking off the interview series, our coauthor Steve Kasoff provides background on the credit 
derivatives business. From his experience in the 1990s with Wall Street dealers, he trace s 
the development of CDOs in their first instance to distressed debt from commercial real 
estate failures. Hedge funds recognized an investment opportunity, Kasoff explains, giving 
wind to the sector. CDOs made up of pools of debt from various industries g one wrong 
enabled them to extract value from undervalued assets. 
In the early 2000s, the inclusion of residential mortgage debt in CDOs and the ensuing 
demand from large banks and insurers triggered a further round of innovation. The “pay-as-
you-go” credit  default swap (CDS) enabled more investors, on a global scale, to join the 
subprime boom using synthetic CDOs. Kasoff explains how the regulatory regime and the 
role of the rating agencies were crucial to the CDO machine. Notably, regulators did not 
require insurers to hold capital against CDS exposures. Meanwhile, rating agencies provided 
the AAA ratings that institutional investors needed, using faulty models and brushing off 
criticism on their way to record profits from CDO issuances. Shorting subprime C DOs was 
more fraught, lonely, and costly than many imagine, Kasoff explains. When the downturn did 
375
Wall Street’s Subprime Debacle Lieber and Kasoff

--- Page 8 ---
come, it occurred far more suddenly and massively than anyone in the market had been 
expecting—including short sellers. 
Few parts of the subprime CDO machine  gained more infamy from the events of 2007 –08 
than the rating agencies. Eric Kolchinsky, a former Moody’s analyst, explains how a once 
stodgy, marginal institution transformed into a competitive oligopoly bent on maximizing 
profits—and why the agencies fe ll short in their risk assessment. Formerly private 
partnerships, the rating agencies became publicly held companies dedicated to shareholder 
value during this time. The surging credit derivative industry presented major challenges to 
the agencies, which w ere not accustomed or equipped to analyze complex structured 
products. In the absence of an optimal methodology, profit incentives spurred agency 
directors to normalize the use of inapt models and faulty assumptions. A whistleblower in 
2009, Kolchinsky ref lects on rating agency reform a decade later: while there has been 
widespread recognition that rating agency shortcomings were central to the subprime boom 
and bust, post-crisis reforms were relatively minor. In contrast to bank regulation, the rating 
agency regime continues along the same general lines —and with some of the same 
vulnerabilities. 
The generalized blindness to systemic risk in 2005 –07 takes specific form in Sohail Khan’s 
discussion of investment mindsets among dealers and institutional clients . As managing 
director for fixed-income sales at Citigroup during the period, Khan handled accounts of both 
large institutional investors and hedge funds. In his interview, Khan identifies what he calls 
three “fundamental truths” —core assumptions that were  absolutely unquestionable in the 
minds of market participants at the time: (1) housing prices never go down nationally; (2) 
any losses will be normally distributed; and (3) you can break up debt products. Khan’s 
anecdotes provide more than one breathtakin g example of these kinds of blindness, which 
were shared by producers, rating agencies, and investors. The overriding priority of dealers 
was to maximize revenue from fees by producing and moving greater CDO volumes. At peak 
boom, Wall Street firms shifted  to holding tranches of CDOs they had produced. But not all 
of the big dealers were reckless in the same measure —a crucial detail that emerges from 
Khan’s interview. What he calls the “provenance” of the CDO structuring group —where it 
originated from and sat in relation to the firm’s institutional hierarchy—shaped its approach 
to risk management. 
Brian Stoker offers a strong argument for the logic of US credit markets, a damning 
indictment of top leadership at two Wall Street firms, and criticism of the financial regulatory 
regime before and after the crisis. As a midlevel banker at Merrill Lynch and Citigroup, Stoker 
structured CDOs, managed the warehouses, and then helped liquidate the firm’s book as the 
market began to tank in 2007. He explains how regulatory practices facilitated the expansion 
of CDO issuance. Allowing insurers to allocate zero capital against their swap exposures 
made the negative basis trade easy. It became advantageous for dealers to buy and hold AAA 
tranches, Stoker explains, detailin g their off-balance-sheet maneuvers to grow their upside 
exposure. Investors and dealers were not behaving fraudulently, Stoker makes clear, but 
rather in a self -interested way within the permissive rules and norms of the system. The 
glaring malpractice he  attests to occurred at the senior management level of the largest 
376
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
banks, who closed their eyes to the growing risk in the interests of short -term profits. 
Financial crises happen every 10 years, Stoker concludes, yet each one tends to be dismissed 
as an unforeseen “100-year event.” 
Dubbed “the grandfather of CDOs,” Chris Ricciardi brings a perspective that encompasses his 
successive roles as pioneering financial engineer, field general running production armies, 
and buy-side executive. The essential purpose of a CDO, Ricciardi clarifies, is to create long -
term leverage on an illiquid asset. He takes issue with several popular conceptions: short 
selling did not cause the financial crisis, nor were rating agencies to blame for modeling 
home values using the i nflated prices that they had been appraised at; furthermore, the 
volume of asset -backed securities (ABS) issuance was too small to have caused the GFC. 
Rather, Ricciardi highlights the “funding mismatch” within large institutions that took long -
term risk while funding it with very short-term liabilities. The concentration of risk in certain 
large overleveraged investment banks created a systemic vulnerability. In the absence of any 
regulatory limit on short selling, the massive volume of shorts drove other CDO investors to 
sell at massive losses. Had the securities been held to maturity, the recovery in housing 
prices would have undone any major losses. Ricciardi expresses support for a limit on the 
volume of shorts. 
As the boom accelerated, it spawned  a cottage industry known as the CDO manager. 
Overwhelming demand for CDOs spurred dealer firms to outsource the management of the 
CDOs. Veteran Wall Street insider Jim Finkel takes us through the short rise and fall of the 
CDO manager niche from his exper ience. The CDO manager would select the portfolio of 
assets for a CDO, working closely with the dealer that would market the CDO to investors. 
The CDO manager then managed those assets over the lifetime of the CDO. The business 
model was fee based with rel atively fixed costs and a strong incentive to increase assets 
under management. 
The prudent investment philosophy that Finkel instilled in his firm soon ran against the 
pressures of the market. He saw the CDO manager’s role as clearly on the buy side, but many 
manager firms aligned more with the dealers in their behavior. With global investors 
crowding into the market on the buy side, Wall Street dealers pushed CDO managers to select 
dubious investments. Finkel’s Dynamic Credit Partners avoided buying the most toxic assets; 
he later discovered that some of these were designed for short sellers. The problem of CDOs 
as an asset class, Finkel concludes, was not the design of the security but rather the velocity 
and volume of the debt being securitized during th e boom. The rating agencies succumbed 
to a perverse incentive to sign off on senior CDO tranches as being AAA quality. Major dealer 
firms were riven and out of control, addicted to fee revenue from CDO issuance. US 
regulators were mistaken, Finkel suggests, in failing to rein in these players. 
Stephen King shares a vivid perspective on the subprime CDO market saga from his position 
as head of an ABS correlation desk at Barclays. Managing a delta -hedged portfolio of credit 
derivatives required King to constantly evaluate market assumptions in relation to his own 
assumptions. Hedging to limit risk, constantly updating his model, and stress testing his 
portfolio before the crisis enabled King and his team to emerge whole—an exception among 
377
Wall Street’s Subprime Debacle Lieber and Kasoff

--- Page 10 ---
CDO market makers. They observed the surge in demand on the part of large banks for AAA 
risk. The high yields from CDOs enabled the banks to subsidize their corporate credit lending 
operations, a core business, that were hard -pressed by the low interest rate environment. 
The h erd behavior into CDOs made a mistaken market consensus even more damaging, 
worsening the collapse that would come. 
4. Bringing It All Together; Looking Back and Looking Ahead 
Considered together, the testimonials of these market participants provide a perspe ctive 
distinct from those of the crisis response actors commonly profiled—the lawyers, regulators, 
and economists leading the government authorities. Interestingly, in comparison to the 
government actors, the market participants we interviewed are equally nuanced in their 
assessments of 2007 and 2020 but consistently more negative about the present and future 
crisis outlook. Regarding the pandemic crisis and the sharp but brief recession it caused, they 
recognize the crucial success of the federal intervent ions of 2020. Looking forward, they 
express concerns about the risks from moral hazard, overborrowing, and the unintended 
consequences of repeated massive interventions. 
Lastly, in addition to the interview summaries, the “Anatomy of a Trade” article prese nts a 
parable, a sketch in eight parts of a single fictitious subprime CDO transaction. Informed by 
expert interviews, documentary research, and the author’s firsthand experience, the 
anatomy breaks down the different parts of the CDO origination process and shows the ways 
that they connect. It reveals the sequence of key events in the creation of a typical CDO. 
Beginning with a hedge fund manager’s proposal, moving to a large Wall Street dealer, then 
proceeding to a buy -side investor’s discussion, each sce ne reveals different players 
interacting with each other. Their give and take reflects the various perspectives 
documented in the expert interviews within one imaginary deal. 
Delving into the details of the subprime CDO trade of 2005–07 is potentially valuable in two 
regards. First, it helps us better understand the Global Financial Crisis, specifically the ways 
that the subprime market was connected to structural vulnerabilities that propelled 
contagion through a global system. Second, beyond the GFC, we s uspect that students of 
financial crises will recognize patterns in the CDO machine that transcend this particular era 
and relate to other crises—past, present, and future. 
 
378
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1