--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
Blanket Guarantees Survey Blanket Guarantees Survey 
Christian M. McNamara 
Yale School of Management 
Carey K. Mott 
Yale School of Management 
Greg Feldberg 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
McNamara, Christian M.; Mott, Carey K.; Feldberg, Greg; and Metrick, Andrew (2022) "Blanket Guarantees 
Survey," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 4, 103-132. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1440 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/4 
This Survey is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This survey is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol4/iss4/4

--- Page 3 ---
Blanket Guarantee Survey1 
Christian M. McNamara,2 Carey K. Mott,3 Greg Feldberg,4 and Andrew Metrick5 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Survey 
December 22, 2022 
Abstract 
This paper surveys 10 blanket guarantee (BG) programs across 13 Key Design Decisions. The 
defining characteristics of these programs in terms of their inclusion in our BG series are (a) 
that they guaranteed a broader range of liabilities beyond deposit accounts and (b) that the 
guarantees covered existing liabilities in addition to newly issued ones. Each case represents 
an effort to eliminate creditors’ incentive to withdraw funding from institutions by 
guaranteeing that the funding will be paid back even if the institutions are unable to do so 
themselves. The main  themes that emerge  are: (a) the inability of blanket guarantees to 
address underlying problems  without complementary liquidity support and restructuring 
measures; (b) the importance of credibility, particularly as related to the amount of liabilities 
guaranteed relative to fiscal resources ; (c) the need to address the moral hazard s that a 
blanket guarantee creates, by restricting banks’ behavior during the acute phase of a crisis—
for example, through interest-rate caps or bans on aggressive marketing—and by promising 
to increase official supervisory oversight as the crisis extends into its chronic phase; (d) the 
importance of effective communication; and (e) the importance of clear political support for 
a program that represents potentially substantial fiscal costs, which authorities may be 
unable to quantify at the time of the announcement.  
Keywords: blanket guarantee, deposit insurance 
  
 
1 This survey is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project modules 
considering blanket guarantee programs. Modules are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Director, New Bagehot Project, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
3 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
4 Research Scholar and Director of Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
5 Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of Management. 
103

--- Page 4 ---
Introductory Note: This survey is an analysis of important considerations for policymakers 
seeking to establish a blanket guarantee (BG) program. It is based on insights derived from 
case studies of 10 specific BG programs the Yale Program on Financial Stability has 
completed and from the existing literature on the topic. While this survey can help inform a 
decision about whether or not to establish a  BG program, our main purpose is to assist 
policymakers who have already made that decision in designing the most effective program 
possible. In analyzing the programs that are the focus of this survey, we used a color -coded 
system to highlight certain particularly noteworthy design features.  
Treatment Meaning 
BLUE – INTERESTING A design feature that is interesting and that 
policymakers may want to consider. Typically, 
this determination is based on the observation 
that the design feature involves a unique and 
potentially promising way of addressing a 
challenge common to this type of program that 
may not be obvious. Less commonly, empirical 
evidence or a consensus will indicate that the 
design feature was effective in this context, in 
which case we will describe that evidence or 
consensus. 
YELLOW – CAUTION INDICATED A design feature that policymakers should 
exercise caution in considering. Typically, this 
determination is based on the observation that 
the designers of the feature later made 
significant changes to the feature with the 
intention of improving the program. Less 
commonly, empirical evidence or a consensus 
will indicate that the design feature was 
ineffective in this context, in which case we will 
describe that evidence or consensus. 
FOOTNOTE IN ITALICS  
 
Where the reason that a given design feature 
has been highlighted is not apparent from the 
text, it is accompanied by an italicized footnote 
that explains why we chose to highlight it. 
Where necessary, these footnotes will be used 
to identify any considerations that should be 
kept in mind when thinking about the feature. 
This highlighting is not intended to be dispositive. The fact that a design feature is not 
highlighted or is highlighted yellow does not mean that it should not be considered or that it 
will never be effective under any circu mstances. Similarly, the fact that a design feature is 
not highlighted or is highlighted blue does not mean that it should always be considered or 
will be effective under all circumstances. The highlighting is our subjective attempt to guide 
readers toward  certain design features that (1) may not be obvious but are worth 
considering or (2) require caution. 
104
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
Introduction 
The loss of short-term funding for banks and other financial intermediaries has accelerated 
financial crises throughout history. Often this loss has taken the form of a traditional bank 
run by depositors who have the right to access their funds on demand ; their widespread 
withdrawal requests can spread  in a crisis even to well -run financial institutions . Account 
guarantee (AG) programs em erged as a potential tool to prevent or reverse these runs  
(McNamara, Kulam, et al. 2022). By guaranteeing that deposits would be paid back even in 
the event of an institution’s failure, these AG programs sought to eliminate the incentive to 
run. But the growing reliance of financial institutions on sources of funding beyond deposit 
accounts means that there are other types of short-term creditors with the ability and  
incentive to run during a crisis . This creates a potential need to guarantee other types o f 
liabilities. 
This paper surveys 10 blanket guarantee (BG) programs adopted during crises. Each case 
represents an effort to eliminate creditors’ incentive to withdraw funding from institutions 
by guaranteeing that the funding will be paid back even if the institutions are unable to do 
so. Figure 1 lists the 10 programs. The defining characteristics of these programs in terms of 
their inclusion in our BG series are (a) that they guaranteed a broader range of liabilities 
beyond deposit accounts and (b) that the guarantees covered existing liabilities in addition 
to newly is sued ones. This makes our definition of a BG program narrower than some 
previous studies. Laeven and Valencia (2008), for example, define blanket guarantees to also 
include programs that guarantee only deposit s but in an unlimited amount.  We chose to 
include such programs in our earlier AG series based on our observation that the design of 
an unlimited deposit account guarantee is typically more similar to that of a limited deposit 
account guarantee than it is to a guarantee on a broader range of liabilitie s. Similarly, we 
concluded that programs that guarantee only newly issued bank debt were sufficiently 
unique to warrant treatment in their own bank debt guarantee (DG) series (see McNamara, 
Feldberg, et al. 2020).  
The main body of the paper analyzes 13 Key Design Decisions. Wherever possible,  we 
explore why policymakers responded the way they did. The paper seeks to distill important 
considerations for policymakers when establishing BG programs. Among the themes that 
emerge are (a) the inability of blanket guarantees to address underlying problems  without 
complementary liquidity support and restructuring measures; (b) the importance of 
credibility, particularly as related  to the amount  of liabilities guaranteed relative to fiscal 
resources; (c) the need to address the moral hazard that a blanket guarantee creates , by 
restricting banks’ behavior during the acute phase of a crisis—for example, through interest-
rate caps or bans on aggress ive marketing—and promising to increase official supervisory 
oversight as the crisis extends into its chronic phase; (d) the importance of effective 
communication; and (e) the importance of clear political support for a program that 
represents potentially substantial fiscal costs, which authorities may be unable to quantify 
at the time of the announcement.  
To frame our discussion of crisis-era BG programs, it is helpful to think of financial crises and 
policy responses as having two phases : acute and chron ic. In the initial , acute phase, the 
105
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 6 ---
financial system has an obvious liquidity problem—runs on banks are easy to spot—but the 
underlying solvency of the financial system is difficult to judge. During this acute phase, 
policy responses need to be fast and emphasize direct liquidity support, either in the form of 
emergency lending or liability guarantees. To achieve these goals, policy should be targeted 
to influence the behavior of depositors and other suppliers of short -term credit to banks . 
Authorities should avoid any measures that might interfere with the urgent need to promote 
systemic liquidity during the acute phase of a crisis.  
In the later, chronic phase, the immediate liquidity pressures have eased but any underlying 
solvency problems remain. In th e traditional banking sector, a chronic phase would be 
characterized by low capital levels at banks that hold back long -term lending. A chronically 
weak banking sector is a drag on economic growth, and is a main reason that downturns are 
deeper and recover ies take longer in recessions that follow financial crises (Jordà, 
Schularick, and Taylor 2013) . During the chronic phase, policy should be targeted to 
influence the behavior of the banks themselves. During the chronic phase, also, it becomes 
more feasible for the authorities to allow weak banks to fail or to resolve them through a sale 
or merger, because concerns about potential contagion effects have receded.  
Government crisis interventions inevitably elevate moral  hazard risks. For a bank, 
government interventions create an incentive to take more risk, since the bank’s executives 
know they will be nefit from the upside while the government will take the risk on the 
downside. For a bank’s depositors and creditors, government interventions dilute the 
incentive to monitor their investments in the bank. We argue that the authorities’ approach 
to moral h azard concerns should change as a crisis evolves from the acute phase to the 
chronic phase. In the acute phase—where the programs studied here were introduced—the 
over-riding priority is to stop runs by depositors and other creditors. In general, that means 
that a uthorities need to prioritize the immediate behavior of creditors over the potential 
long-run moral hazard risks. Amid uncertainty about bank solvency, for example, it would 
not be rational for creditors to do any deep analysis of their banks. The simplest response to 
solvency concerns is to withdraw one’s funds, since withdrawal has only a nuisance cost but 
potentially a large benefit. Some have argued that such creditor runs can provide a check on 
moral hazard, but we argue that relying on creditor runs as a form of market discipline is not 
an efficient means for addressing moral hazard and could be disastrous during the acute 
phase of a crisis . Facing runs on banks, authorities should not pursue policies to mitigate 
moral hazard—like executive compensation restrictions—that could discourage banks from 
participating in a voluntary government liquidity program. On the other hand, governments 
in our BG cases have used various tools to prevent banks from taki ng advantage of blanket 
guarantees to compete aggressively for depositors , a moral hazard  risk that also raises 
banks’ costs of funding at a bad time. For example, authorities have capped the interest rates 
banks can pay on deposits and banned aggressive advertising of the government guarantee. 
Such policies can address potential moral hazards without seeming punitive, thus getting the 
advantage of reducing the potential distortions of the program without discouraging 
participation by banks.  
In a chronic p hase, moral hazard  concerns play a larger role. Here, policymakers have a 
public-policy interest to encourage banks to do more lending. But maintaining a BG program 
106
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 7 ---
in the chronic phase can encourage banks to make riskier loans  and can distort the 
competitive landscape. With more time to select and monitor banks, these benefits and costs 
can be properly balanced. In particular, heightened supervision of the institutions covered 
by expanded guarantees can help the authorities address the moral hazard concerns that 
arise during the chronic phase of crises.  
Political support is key. In Sweden, authorities used a joint announcement with the political 
opposition to unveil the country’s BG program. Some have credited this broad political 
support as having contributed to the BG program’s strong credibility (Englund 2015). On the 
flip side, the lack of political unity can create additional obstacles to the implementation and 
operation of a successful BG program. Political turmoil —governments changing hands  or 
otherwise facing significant dissent  mid-crisis—in Ecuador, Indonesia, and Thailand hurt 
those countries’ BG programs.  In Thailand, for example, the fragile political climate 
prevented authorities from intervening more rapidly in weak banks covered by the blanket 
guarantee. This may have worsened the crisis  (Nabi and Shivakumar 2001; Santiprabhob 
2003). As discussed in Key Design Decision No. 6, Communication, politically motivated 
secrecy around the early operations of the Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency (IBRA) 
resulted in a lack of public confidence in the agency (Enoch et al. 2001).  
Figure 1: Programs Covered in This Survey 
Case Name Short Title Citation 
Size of 
Banking 
System  
(% of GDP) 
Denmark: General Guarantee Scheme, 2008 Denmark GFC (Hoffner 2022) 219.04% 
Ecuador: Blanket Guarantee, 1998 Ecuador 1998 (Decker 2022a) 25.00% 
Finland: Government Guarantee Fund, Blanket 
Guarantee, 1992 Finland 1992 (Makhija 2022a) 88.18% 
Jamaica: FINSAC Blanket Guarantee, 1997 Jamaica 1997 (George 2022a) 34.09% 
Korea: Blanket Guarantee, 1997 Korea AFC (Decker 2022b) 55.72% 
Indonesia: IBRA Blanket Guarantee 1998 Indonesia AFC (George 2022b) 55.97% 
Ireland: Credit Institution (Financial Support) 
Scheme, 2008 Ireland 2008 (Schaefer-Brown 2022a) 168.19% 
Mexico: FOBAPROA Blanket Guarantee, 
1993–1994 
Mexico 1993–
1994 (Schaefer-Brown 2022b) 30.42% 
Sweden: Bank Support Authority, Blanket 
Guarantee, 1992 Sweden 1992 (Makhija 2022b) 52.51% 
Thailand: FIDF Blanket Guarantee, 1997 Thailand AFC (George 2022c) 171.37% 
 
Sources: Decker 2022a; Decker 2022b; George 2022a; George 2022b; George 2022c; Hoffner 2022; Makhija 2022a; 
Makhija 2022b; Schaefer-Brown 2022a; Schaefer-Brown 2022b. 
  
107
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 8 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: What were the specific motivations for introducing the BG program? 
Despite each  BG program ’s involving a similar desire to protec t creditors from losses on 
covered liabilities, usually with the stated objective of promoting liquidity for institutions or 
the financial system broadly, the programs studied can be categorized as reactions to actual 
runs, preemptive attempt s to bolster c onfidence and prevent the loss of funding, or some 
blend of the two:  
• Actual Run : Widespread loss of funding  causes policymakers to adopt a BG  
program to halt or reverse that loss. 
• Concerns about Confidence : The fear that creditors may be losing confidence 
causes policymakers to adopt a B G program in a pre emptive fashion to prevent a 
loss of funding. 
In our earlier studies of account guarantee (AG) and bank debt guarantee (DG) programs, we 
noted two other common motivations: competition from other jurisdictions that guaranteed 
creditors of their financial institutions, which pressured policymakers to adopt similar 
programs to prevent competitive disadvantage; and supranational requirements adopted by 
bodies such as the European Union (EU). Interestingly, we did not see such forces at work in 
the BG cases. In the case of Ireland, European authorities criticized the country’s unilateral 
blanket guarantee in the Credit Institutions Financial Support Scheme (CIFS); however, they 
responded not with similar blanket guarantees but by expanding existing AG programs (ECB 
2008). (For a list of acronyms used in this survey, see the Glossary.) 
In several BG cases —Jamaica, Sweden, and Thailand —the authorities first guaranteed all 
liabilities for specific troubled financial institutions and later expanded the blanket 
guarantee to a broader set of institutions . One consideration in deciding to guarantee a 
particular institution is whether doing s o will ultimately create pressure to expand the  
guarantees.  
Foreign exchange pressures were an important motivation in several BG cases. For financial 
systems dependent on foreign creditors, the threat of currency devaluation can cause those 
creditors to withdraw funding. As will be discussed, blanket guarantees may be less effective 
when foreign exchange pressures are present. 
  
108
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2: Motivations by BG Program 
Case Responding to 
Runs Preemptive 
Foreign 
Exchange 
Pressure 
Denmark GFC  ✓  
Ecuador 1998 ✓  ✓ 
Finland 1992  ✓ ✓ 
Indonesia AFC ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Ireland GFC ✓   
Jamaica 1997 ✓ ✓  
Korea AFC ✓  ✓ 
Mexico 1993  ✓ ✓ 
Sweden 1992 ✓  ✓ 
Thailand AFC ✓ ✓ ✓ 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
For those programs introduced in response to actual runs, the question of who was running 
and to where  becomes important . In Jamaica, creditors ran from local institutions to the 
branches of foreign banks. Ecuador saw shifts to US dollar deposits and the withdrawal of 
trade credit lines provided by foreign bank s. In Korea, the run first took place on foreign 
debt. Thailand experienced runs on finance companies and small banks.  In Sweden, there 
were runs on one of the largest banks in the country and on Marknadsbevis (a form of short-
term borrowing, like commercial paper (CP), which were then a significant source of funding 
for finance companies).    
In some insta nces, the specific nature  of an actual or feared run resulted in a  BG program 
designed to cover the liabilities or institutions at risk . Korea’s BG program began by 
guaranteeing foreign debt, which was the focus of creditor runs, and later expanded to 
include deposits as well. In Ecuador, the threat posed by withdrawn trade credit lines caused 
policymakers to target such liabilities with its BG program.  
2. Part of a Package : Was the BG program intended to work on its own or was it 
introduced alongside, or otherwise seen as operating in tandem with, other policy 
interventions? 
One of the earliest decisions confronted in designing a  BG program is whether the program 
will operate alone or in combination with other policy interventions.  As discussed in Key 
Design Decision No. 1, Purpose , in implementing BG programs policymakers are typically 
responding to, or anticipating, creditor runs. Emergency liquidity facilities intended to 
restore lost funding were for this reason a common complement to BG programs. Indeed, 
researchers such as Laeven and Valencia (2008) and Kane and Klingebiel (2004) have used 
109
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 10 ---
a decline in emergency liquidity facilit y usage as a proxy for the success of BG programs. 
Their assumption is that if such usage goes down following the introduction of a BG program, 
the BG program has succeeded in restoring liquidity because banks’ need for the emergency 
liquidity facility has receded. 
Given that blanket guarantees are a far broader version of a tool —deposit insurance—that 
existed in several of the studied jurisdictions even before the crisis, several of the BG 
programs worked alongside deposit insurance systems. In Ireland,  the CIFS acted as a 
supplement to the existing Deposit Guarantee Scheme (DGS). The DGS covered deposits up 
to EUR 100,000  (USD 140,000) ,6 while the CIFS covered deposits above this amount and 
other liabilities not guaranteed by the DGS. Denmark’s General Guarantee Scheme (GGS) 
supplemented an existing, privately funded deposit insurance system  called the Guarantee 
Fund for Depositors and Investors, which covered deposits up to EUR 50,000.    
Liquidity-focused interventions will be insufficient, however, when financial institutions’ 
capital has eroded. For these institutions, injections of capital become  necessary. 
Recapitalization programs are for this reason another recurrent component of packages 
involving BG programs.  
The need to combine blanket guaran tees with other interventions often resulted in BG 
programs that policymakers embedded within a larger umbrella . In Finland, the blanket 
guarantee was part of the Government Guarantee Fund ( GGF), which also included capital 
injections and funding for asset management companies . Policymakers paired Jamaica’s 
blanket guarantee with bank rehabilitation efforts as part of the Financial Sector Adjustment 
Company (FINSAC). Indonesia’s IBRA similarly combined the blanket guarantee with bank 
rehabilitation. 
In several countries, BG programs existed alongside support packages from the International 
Monetary Fund ( IMF) and other multilateral bodies . This include d Ecuador (IMF, World 
Bank, Inter-American Development Bank , Andean Development Corporation ), Indonesia  
(IMF), Ireland (IMF, EU), Korea (IMF, World Bank, Asian Development Bank), Mexico (IMF), 
and Thailand (IMF). As Laeven and Valencia (2008) note, even where BG programs appear 
to have been successful in stopping creditor runs, the existence of such multilateral support 
packages may actually account for the restoration of confidence.  
Figure 3  shows which types of  interventions policymakers combined with BG programs. 
Many of these combinations were not as obvious as those contained under the GGF, FINSAC, 
or IBRA umbrellas. The determi nations reflected in Figure 3  are based on some evidence 
indicating that policymakers thought of the BG program in question as operating in tandem 
with these other interventions. 
  
 
6 Per Yahoo Finance, EUR 1.00 = USD 1.45 on September 30, 2008. 
110
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 3: Other Key Interventions Combined with BG Programs 
Case Ad hoc capital 
injections 
Broad-based 
capital 
Injections 
Broad-based 
emergency 
lending 
Restructuring 
Denmark GFC ✓  ✓ ✓ 
Ecuador 1998   ✓ ✓ 
Finland 1992 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Indonesia AFC  ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Ireland GFC  ✓ ✓  
Jamaica 1997  ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Korea AFC   ✓ ✓ 
Mexico 1993 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Sweden 1992 ✓  ✓ ✓ 
Thailand AFC  ✓ ✓ ✓ 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
The existence of a blanket guarantee can also prompt policymakers to undertake additional 
interventions. With guarantees leaving the state responsible for creditor losses stemming 
from failed institutions, policymakers may be inclined to take the steps necessary to prevent 
such failures. This mi ght include interventions that policymakers would not normally 
consider. In Sweden, for example, the Riksbank extended liquidity to troubled banks on an 
unsecured basis —that is, without imposing the central bank’s usual collateral 
requirements—because the government had already assumed responsibility for the banks’ 
obligations through the blanket guarantee (Borio, Vale, and von Peter 2010 ; Lundgren 
2009).7  
As will be discussed further in the Conclusion, the failure to combine BG programs with more 
comprehensive measures aimed at correcting underlying problems  in the financial system 
can undermine the effectiveness of blanket guarantees. This appears to have been the case 
in Mexico, where the Fondo Bancario de Protección al Ahorro (FOBAPROA) initially restored 
a degree of confidence to the banking system before concerns returned stemming from a 
failure to take adequate steps to put the system on a sustainable path to full recovery (World 
Bank 1998). BG programs can also be combined with other policies or programs that will be 
counterproductive. In Ecuador, the imposition of a financial transaction tax and the 
introduction of a bank holiday and partial deposit freeze contributed to continued creditor 
runs even after policymakers established a blanket guarantee (IMF 2000; Jácome H. 2004). 
 
7 Although there is no indication that the Riksbank’s unsecured lending resulted in problems in this case, we have 
highlighted this practice as requiring caution because departing from typical collateral requirements may have 
consequences in certain contexts. 
111
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 12 ---
3. Legal Authority: What legal basis did policymakers rely on in establishing the BG 
program? Was there a need for new legislation or could they rely on existing 
authority?  
A key consideration for policymakers is the legal authority that they will rely upon in 
establishing a BG program. In some jurisdictions, established frameworks may enable 
policymakers to use existing authority to implement blanket guarantees  without any 
additional act by a legislative body. In other jurisdictions,  such an additional act may be 
required before a BG program can be adopted.  The legal basis for a BG  program can have 
important implications for the program’s speed and design.  
In several cases, policymakers announced BG programs without specific legal authority and 
only created that authority weeks or months later. Guarantees based on a government’s 
announced intention to stand behind the liabilities of its financial institutions are sometimes 
referred to as “political guarantees” and present a unique situation from a legal perspective. 
When such intentions are not transposed into law, they may have unc lear legal status.  In 
Mexico, for example, the law required FOBAPROA to make an annual announcement 
concerning the amount of bank obligations it would protect in the coming year. In 1993 and 
1994, FOBAPROA announced that it would try to stand behind all liabilities of the banking 
system other than subordinated debt. A 1995 report from the World Bank cites Mexican 
authorities and private lawyers as viewing these announcements as creating no actual legal 
obligation on the part of FOBAPROA  (World Bank 1995) . Whether or not it created a legal 
obligation, the government honor ed the BG commitment by  using FOBAPROA for  bank 
recapitalization and the purchase  of non -performing loans from tro ubled banks , thereby 
protecting creditors. 
Figure 4 divides the BG programs into those requiring a new act by a legislative body and 
those that relied on existing legal authority.  Included in this latter category are programs 
created pursuant to an executive or other emergency decree. In the AG and DG contexts, the 
need for a legislative act often (but not always) resulted in significant delays between the 
announcement of a program and its implementation  (McNamara, Feldberg, et al.  2020; 
McNamara, Kulam, et al. 2022). Interestingly, for BG programs this does not appear to have 
been as big an issue. In most BG programs, there was little to no delay between 
announcement and implementation, even where legislative approval was required. Two 
exceptions were Finla nd and Sweden. In Finland, there was a six -month gap between a 
government statement committing to support banks under any circumstances and 
legislation enacting its BG program . It is not clear that observers viewed the government’s 
initial statement as the  announcement of a blanket guarantee. In Sweden, approximately 
three months elapsed between announcement and implement ation. It could be that BG 
programs were a more aggressive intervention introduced only after crises had become 
more acute, ensuring adequate political will for rapid implementation.  
  
112
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 4: BG Program Legal Authority 
Case New Legislation 
Required 
No New Legislation 
Required 
Days Elapsed Between 
Announcement and 
Authorization 
Denmark GFC ✓  7 
Ecuador 1998 ✓  0 
Finland 1992 ✓  178 
Indonesia AFC  ✓ 0 
Ireland GFC ✓  <1 month 
Jamaica 1997  ✓ 0 
Korea AFC ✓   119* 
Mexico 1993 ✓  0 
Sweden 1992 ✓  84 
Thailand AFC ✓  0 
 
* For foreign debt only; guarantees on deposits and collateralized commercial paper were effective 
immediately after announcement. 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
European Union member states had to consider not only their own national legal 
requirements, but also the guidelines and directives of the EU.  Despite this, Ireland acted 
unilaterally in announcing the CIFS.  Only after this announcement did it engage with EU 
authorities to secure the necessary approvals. This resulted in criticism fr om those 
authorities (ECB 2008). 
The absence of an adequate legal framework can create problems for BG programs. This is 
especially true with respect to the framework for resolving failed institutions. An inadequate 
resolution framework can hamper the abil ity to deal with failed institutions and protect 
creditors pursuant to the blanket guarantee. Under Thai law, for example, authorities were 
initially only able to close firms and make cash payouts in satisfaction of the guarantee. Thai 
lawmakers subsequently passed legislation to  give authorities the ability to take over and 
resolve insolvent financial institutions.  
4. Administration: Who was responsible for the day -to-day activities of the BG 
program? 
A key question in designing a  BG program is who will administer it. The first decision is 
whether to create a separate entity or to give the responsibility to the central bank , bank 
regulator, treasury, an existing deposit insurance agency, or a newly created insurer (see 
Figure 5). Particularly for newly created entities, one question is whether they will have the 
resources and expertise necessary to effectively administer a BG program. An additional 
113
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 14 ---
consideration is the other financial stability roles of the responsible entity. For exam ple, a 
BG administrator that is also responsible for bank supervision may have access to 
information that helps it administer the guarantee. 
Figure 5: BG Program Administration 
Case Existing Deposit 
Insurer Other: 
Denmark GFC ✓  
Ecuador 1998  New deposit guarantee corporation, overseen by 
government, finance ministry, and central bank 
Finland 1992 ✓*  
Indonesia AFC ✓**  
Ireland GFC ✓  
Jamaica 1997  Merged ad hoc guarantee administrator with newly 
created deposit insurer, overseen by finance 
ministry, central bank, and private bankers  
Korea AFC ✓*  
Mexico 1993 ✓**  
Sweden 1992  Newly created deposit insurer, overseen by finance 
ministry 
Thailand AFC  Newly created deposit insurer, overseen by finance 
ministry and central bank  
 
* The deposit insurer preceded the blanket guarantee by a few months.  
** Coverage of the existing deposit insurer was extremely limited. 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Although private entities have often been involved in AG programs (see McNamara, Kulam, 
et al. 2022), this appears to be much less common in the BG context. Denmark was unique 
among our BG programs in employing a private -public model, in which  a private industry 
association (the Private Contingency Association , or PCA) partnered with a newly created 
public body (the Financial Stability Company, or FSC) to administer the blanket guarantee . 
Otherwise, the BG programs studied were publicly administered. 
Changes in administration over the course of a BG program can signal underlying problems 
or even be the source of such problems. In Finland, the newly created GGF lacked staff of its 
own and relied on employees assigned from the Finnish central bank  and bank regulatory 
agency. This was both inadequate given the number of troubled banks and potentially 
problematic from a conflict -of-interest standpoint , given the role of these bodies in bank 
supervision. Finland ultimately adopted legislation reforming the administration of the GGF 
and adding permanent staff  (Nyberg and Vihriälä 1994) . In Indonesia, shifts in 
administration between IBRA and the Indonesian central bank delayed payment of 
114
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 15 ---
interbank claims under the blanket guarantee, undermining its cred ibility (Enoch et al. 
2001).  
5. Governance: Who was responsible for the oversight of the BG program? Were 
there any disclosure requirements? 
After determining who will be responsible for the day -to-day activities of a  BG program, 
policymakers must then decide how those activities will be overseen. Because many of the 
programs in our survey were separate government agencies or corporations, they had 
boards providing oversight. 
The composition of boards is an important consideration . They typically included 
government appointees from the finance ministry, central bank, and bank regulator . Many 
had independent members who had no connection to the government. 
Required disclosures can be another important avenue for effective oversight. Many of the 
BG programs  were mandated to issue  regular reports on their activities and submit to 
periodic audits. The absence of these measures or the failure to make the results public could 
trigger concerns about a lack of transparency.  In Mexico, FOBAPROA did not initially make 
its financial statements publicly available (World Bank 1995). Following a change in control 
of the national legislat ure, legislators launched a nine-month investigation into FOBAPROA 
(Haber 2005).  
6. Communication: How did policymakers describe the need for and objectives of the 
BG program? Were there any special communication issues? 
Communication is of particular import ance for BG programs. As with AG programs , broad 
public awareness and understanding of B G programs are essential to their success. B G 
programs cannot instill confidence if creditors do not know they exist  or understand how 
they are intended to work . At the  same time, because of the stigma that can be associated 
with crisis interventions, BG administrators need to communicate in a manner that does not 
erode the very confidence that the programs are  intended to safeguard.  One potential 
approach is to highlight that broad political support exists for addressing the problems that 
are the focus of the interventions. In Sweden, authorities used a joint announcement with 
the political opposition to unveil the country’s BG progr am. Some have credited this broad 
political support as having contributed to the BG program’s strong credibility  (Englund 
2015).8  
As noted in Key Design Decision No. 1, Purpose, the BG programs  studied could have  
different underlying motivations. A key c onsideration from a communication perspective 
was how policymakers described those motivations to the public.  
Despite the importance of effective communication,  some programs seem to have 
experienced difficulties on this front.  In Thailand, a lack of clar ity about the exact liabilities 
 
8 On the flip side, the lack of political unity can create additional obstacles to a successful BG program. Political 
turmoil in Ecuador, Indonesia, and Thailand hindered those countries’ BG programs.  
115
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 16 ---
to be covered by the blanket guarantee and the way it was funded  undermined confidence 
(Nabi and Shivakumar 2001; Sharma 201 3). In Korea, the finance minister failed to 
specifically mention trust funds in his statement on the blanket guarantee, resulting in KRW 
200 billion (USD 175 million) 9 in withdrawals from 23 trust funds across Korea over the 
course of three hours. This panic was arrested only after an association of trust funds issued 
a statement clarifying that the funds were indeed protected (Agence France Presse 1997) . 
Indonesia’s president initially prohibited IBRA from disclosing its operations publicly . As a 
result, depositors and creditors viewed IBRA as non -operational and did not believe that 
their funds were guaranteed (Enoch et al. 2001). 
Both Korea and Indonesia appear to have learned from these initial communication errors . 
In Korea, as the expiration of the bl anket guarantee neared, the Korea Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (KDIC) embarked on a large-scale public awareness campaign to communicate 
the main concepts of the transition to a limited deposit insurance scheme. This included large 
public events, seminars , print advertisements, advertisements by insured institutions, 
Internet-based advertisements, and media channel advertisements. To gauge public 
awareness of the transition, the KDIC also collected surveys  (IADI 2012; KDIC 2001). In 
Indonesia, researchers have credited effective communication about a series of bank 
closures in April 1998 with bolstering confidence in the country’s BG program (Enoch 2000).  
7. Source(s) and Size of Funding: In the event that payouts needed to be made under 
a BG program, where did the money come from and how much was available?  
What would happen if the primary source of funding for a  BG program proved to 
be insufficient? 
A particularly important design decision is the source a nd size of the funding that will be 
used to protect creditors in the event of an institution’s failure. A BG program that creditors 
perceive as backed by an insufficient funding source will not instill confidence in the safety 
of guaranteed liabilities . While many of the BG programs charged fees on participating 
institutions as discussed in Key Design Decision No. 10, Fees, authorities typically did not 
expect such fees to fully cover creditor losses . This possibility raises the question of who 
would be responsible for losses after fee revenue s have been exhausted. In general, the BG 
programs relied on the state’s fiscal resources to support the guarantees. Authorities in 
Denmark employed a unique approach to this question, using the private-public nature of  
the country’s BG program to make the banking sector responsible for a first -loss position 
before the state covered any losses beyond this amount.  
The role of the state as the ultimate source of support for BG programs meant that the state’s 
fiscal position could have considerable influence on the programs’ credibility. Researchers 
have credited strong government finances with contributing to the credibility of Sweden’s 
BG program (Edmonds 2015). Conversely, concerns about the state’s finances undermined 
BG programs’ credibility in Thailand, Ecuador, and Ireland. In Thailand, authorities struggled 
to restore public confidence because of the size of liabilities the program covered and a lack 
of cla rity about t he mechanism for funding  (Nabi and Shivakumar 2001; Santiprabhob 
 
9 Per OFX, USD 1 = KRW 1,040 on November 19, 1997.  
116
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 17 ---
2003). In Ecuador, creditors viewed the guarantee as credible for small institutions, but 
doubted the ability of the state to honor the guarantee in full in the event of the failu re of a 
large institution (Beckerman and Solimano 2002).  
The CIFS in Ireland was the focus of widespread  uncertainty from the outset. In its first 
response to the CIFS released days after the program’s announcement, the European Central 
Bank (ECB) highlighted its concern that the size of the government’s exposure was “very 
large” at a time when the Irish budget was already deteriorating (ECB 2008). Such concerns 
undermined the credibility of the CIFS. The Irish example also illustrates that a blanke t 
guarantee can end up imposing significant fiscal costs on the state. To avoid the failure of 
institutions covered by the guarantee, Irish authorities undertook costly rescue operations. 
Ultimately, the overall cost of the Irish response to its banking cr isis totaled around 40% of 
GDP, the second costliest in advanced economies since the Great Depression (IMF 2012).  
8. Eligible Institutions: What types of institutions were eligible to have their 
liabilities guaranteed under the BG program? Was participation mandatory or 
voluntary? 
In determining what institutions will participate in a BG program, policymakers must define 
eligibility and decide whether participation will be mandatory or voluntary. While in the AG 
and DG program contexts authorities often restricted eligibility to credit institutions, BG 
programs frequently encompassed a broader range of institutions (see Figure 6). And while 
BG programs typically defined eligibility in terms of institution type, they could also target 
specific entities. Ireland’s CIFS initially covered six specific institutions, resulting in concerns 
about preferential treatment  (ECB 2008). Ireland ultimately expanded coverage to include 
certain Irish subsidiaries of foreign banks . E ven with this expansion , coverage remained 
limited to 11 institutions and excluded many banks operating in Ireland (Woll 2014) . In 
Sweden, in addition to the entities eligible as a result of their banking charters, authorities 
specifically included eight other credit institutions  in the country’s BG program because of 
their vital role in the payments system. (Drees and Pazarbasioglu 1995). Programs could also 
include a broader range of institutions, while in practice being primarily focused on a specific 
type. In Korea, merchant banks were the main institutions in need of support and ultimately 
the largest recipients of aid; commercial banks, securities companies, insurance companies, 
mutual savings and finance companies, and credit unions were also eligible. 
The treatment of foreign banks is also a consideration. In Denmark, EU guidelines required 
that foreign branches lacking equivalent coverage in their home countries be eligible for 
inclusion in the deposit side of Denmark’s BG program. Such branches were not entitled to 
have their other liabilities covered. In Ireland, the designation of six specific institutions for 
eligibility initially excluded even the Irish subsidiaries of foreign banks. This caused a run on 
National Irish Bank, a subsidiary of Danske Bank. While Irish  authorities subsequently 
expanded coverage to include certain Irish subsidiaries of foreign banks, many banks 
operating in Ireland remained ineligible.  In Sweden and Finland, by contrast, foreign  
branches were eligible for the BG programs. 
  
117
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 6: Eligible Institutions 
 Types of Institutions 
Case Banks Insurance 
Companies Securities Firms 
Denmark GFC ✓   
Ecuador 1998 ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Finland 1992 ✓   
Indonesia AFC ✓   
Ireland GFC ✓   
Jamaica 1997 ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Korea AFC ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Mexico 1993 ✓   
Sweden 1992 ✓   
Thailand AFC ✓  ✓ 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Exclusion from a BG program could have significant ramifications for the institutions left out. 
As previously noted, National Irish Bank faced heavy withdrawals while not covered by CIFS 
(Woll 201 4). As discus sed in Key Design Decision No. 6, Communication, a 
miscommunication about whether trust funds were included in Korea’s BG program resulted 
in widespread runs on such funds until authorities confirmed their inclusion (Agence France 
Presse 1997). 
Mandatory p articipation was common  for BG programs . For those programs that were 
voluntary, participation could either (a) be automatic with an ability to opt out or (b) require 
an affirmative opting in. Denmark’s BG program was an example of the former. Membership 
in the private association that co -administered the BG program resulted in automatic 
enrollment. I nstitutions could leave the association to opt out.  Indonesia had an opt -in 
program. Eligible institutions had to sign an agreement to participate. 
9. Eligible Liabilities: What types of liabilities were eligible to be guaranteed under 
the BG program? 
In addition to eligible institutions, policymakers must also determine what liabilities can be 
included in BG programs.  Equity, as a non -liability, was uni versally excluded from BG 
programs. Most BG programs similarly excluded subordinated debt because it is also 
intended to absorb losses. Ireland faced significant criticism for covering dated subordinated 
debt, although this appears to have been required by  Irish law  (Baudino, Murphy, and 
Svoronos 2020).  
118
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 19 ---
Another interesting element is the treatment of existing (as opposed to newly issued) 
liabilities. As Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos (2020) point out, medium- and long-term debt 
that is already in place cann ot run: as a legal matter, creditors cannot demand their money 
before the debt is due . Thus, the typical motivations underlying a guarantee (the desire to 
stop or prevent a run) do not apply. Yet all of the BG programs studied included existing 
liabilities within their coverage. Potential explanations include a legal inability to treat 
existing d ebt differently from newly issued debt  (as appears to have been the case in 
Ireland), together with more generalized concerns about the risk of imposing losses on even 
non-runnable liabilities. Such  losses on non -runnable liabilities may (a) undermine 
confidence among the holders of other, runnable forms of liabilities  and (b) result in asset 
sales among holders of non-runnable liabilities, producing contagion. 
In the AG context, the question of which accounts are to be included or excluded from a 
guarantee takes on even greater significance given the risk that the introduction of a 
guarantee will itself trigger a run from non -guaranteed accounts to guaranteed accounts 
(McNamara, Kulam, et al. 2022). This appears not to have been as big a concern in the BG 
context as a result of the generally expansive coverage such programs provide. An exception 
was Jamaica’s BG program, where t here is some evidence that the announcement of the 
program caused a shift to liabilities covered by the guarantee  (although documents do not 
specify the non-guaranteed liabilities from which the shift occurred) (Bonnick 1998). 
As discussed in Key Design Decision No. 1, Purpose, certain BG programs responded to runs 
on specific liabilities and thus had coverage targeting those liabilities. Given that Korea’s run 
focused on foreign debt, its BG program began by guaranteeing such debt specifically, before 
expanding to include deposits  and collateralized commercial paper as well. In Ecuador, the 
threat posed by withdrawn trade credit lines caused policymakers to target such liabilities 
with its BG program. 
The treatment of interest on liabilities is also a consideration. In Thailand, for example, the 
guarantee covered both principal and accrued interest. In Korea, the guarantee initially 
covered both principal and interest. However, after the emergence of moral hazard concerns 
in the form of weak banks offering high interest rates to attract deposits, authorities 
excluded interest for large depositors and covered interest for small depositors only up to 
the market rate (Baliño and Ubide 1999). Ecuador excluded deposits that paid too high a rate 
of interest outright as a means of preventing moral hazard.  
The liabilities  covered by a BG program could change over time . In Ireland, authorities 
reduced the scope of the non -deposit liabilities covered by its BG pro gram as it gradually 
phased out the program. In Ecuador, authorities ended coverage for the trade credit lines 
initially targeted by the country’s BG program while leaving the deposit coverage in place . 
Indonesia’s BG program initially covered derivative transactions broadly, before authorities 
excluded all derivatives other than currency swaps from coverage.  
119
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 20 ---
10. Fees: What fees, if any, did institutions have to pay as part of the BG program? 
Were such fees flat or risk based?  
As noted in Key Design Decision No. 7, Source(s) and Size of Funding, many of the BG 
programs funded themselves at least par tially through fees  paid by covered financial 
institutions. In determining the fees for participation in a  BG program, there is a tension 
between the appropriate fee given the risk to the guarantor and the desire to avoid charging 
institutions too much at a time when they are already strained. Figure 7 shows how each BG 
program approached the fee question.  Unlike AG and DG programs, few BG program s used 
risk-based fees (see McNamara, Feldberg, et al. 2020; McNamara, Kulam, et al. 2022). This 
may stem in part from the speed with which many of the BG programs were implemented, 
leaving little time to properly calibrate a risk -based fee structure. Ireland’s CIFS, one of the 
few BG programs using a risk -based fee, targeted a small number of specific institutions 
rather than the banking system or financial system as a whole. BG programs that used risk-
based fees sometimes relied on general determinations of risk. In Finland, for example, the 
risk-based fee was determined by the GGF’s board based on its assessment of the riskiness 
of an institution’s activities. In contrast, AG and DG programs more consistently tied fees to 
specific measures like credit def ault swap spreads or credit ratings.  Only Korea’s program 
explicitly linked fees with an institution’s credit rating. 
  
120
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 7: BG Program Fees 
 Fee Calculation  
Case Flat Fee Risk-based 
Fee Fee Range 
Denmark GFC  ✓ Unclear 
Ecuador 1998 ✓  65 bps 
Finland 1992  ✓ 0-10 bps 
Indonesia AFC ✓  25 bps 
Ireland GFC  ✓ Unclear 
Jamaica 1997   - 
Korea AFC*  ✓ 100–1,000 bps 
Mexico 1993 ✓  50-70 bps 
Sweden 1992   - 
Thailand AFC ✓  15-20 bps 
 
* Fees for Korea AFC reflect the guarantee for deposit accounts only. 
Source: Authors’ analysis.  
11. Process for Exercising Guarantees:  How and  how quickly would creditors be 
protected in the event of a failure?  
For guarantees of any type to be effective, creditors must be confident that they will have full 
and prompt access to their guaranteed funds (McNamara, Feldberg, et al. 2020; McNamara, 
Kulam, et al. 2022). Delayed payments undermine confidence in guarantees, particularly if 
that delay also imposes losses on creditors. This was the case in Ecuador, where d elays in 
guarantee payouts amid rising inflation and a depreciating local currency  contributed to 
continued runs on the banking system  (Jácome H. 2004) . To avoid this outcome, some BG 
programs specified the period of time during which any guarantee payouts  had to be made. 
In Thailand, for example, the Financial Institution Development Fund (FDIF) established a 
30-day period for the payment of funds in the event of an institution’s insolvency. 
Cash payouts were not the only mechanism by which creditors could be protected as part of 
a BG program, however. Purchase and assumption transactions —in whic h a healthy 
institution would take on the liabilities of a failed bank —were a common approach in the 
event of insolvency. As discussed in Key Design Decision No. 3, Legal Authority, the lack of 
an adequate framework for pursuing alternatives to cash payouts in the event of insolvency 
can hurt the efficacy of BG programs. 
A key consideration for BG programs introduced in the context of foreign exchange pressures 
is how foreign creditors will be protected. Payment in domestic currency  (an approach 
adopted in both Thailand and Indonesia, for example)  involves the risk of loss to foreign 
121
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 22 ---
creditors. But payment in foreign currencies may undermine the credibility of the guarantee 
based on the government’s foreign reserves position.  Given this difficulty in protect ing 
foreign creditors, it is perhaps not surprising that BG programs appear to be less effective 
when foreign exchange pressures are present, as will be discussed in the Conclusion. 
12. Other Restrictions: Were there other requirements for eligible institution s or 
creditors? 
Crisis interventions often require the institutions receiving assistance to agree to certain 
restrictions as a condition for participation. Typically, these restrictions seek to address 
moral hazard concerns or to otherwise make the interventions more politically palatable. DG 
programs often had restrictions on balance-sheet growth, dividend payments, and executive 
compensation (McNamara, Feldberg, et al. 2020). However, these types of restrictions were 
not a significant feature of AG programs (McNamara, Kulam, et al. 2022).  
The BG programs studied are more similar to AG programs in this respect. It could be that 
policymakers deemed specific restrictions overly burdensome because BG programs, like AG 
programs, were intended to be more broad -based and were o ften mandatory. In lieu of 
specific restrictions, policymakers often cited heightened supervision as a development that 
would accompany BG programs to address concerns such as moral hazard. This approach to 
addressing moral hazard in the BG context require s that a jurisdiction have adequate 
capacity to engage in such supervision, which was not always the case. 
Those BG programs that did have other restrictions typically focused on addressing 
behaviors that a guarantee could promote. Ecuador, Indonesia, and Thailand all imposed 
policies that sought to address the incentive of insured banks to compete for deposits with 
high interest rates. Such competition could encourage depositors to shift funds to banks that 
paid higher interest rates, resulting in further contagion in a banking sector already facing 
heightened liquidity demands. Also, guaranteeing those interest payments could ultimatel y 
be expensive for the government, if banks offering high interest rates later required 
government bailouts. By imposing caps on the rates of interest that could be paid on deposits, 
policymakers sought to limit this form of moral hazard.  
Indonesia also l imited loan growth and Thailand capped foreign borrowing . In Denmark, 
there was a ban on dividends, stock buybacks,  aggressive marketing, and unspecified risky 
behavior. It is perhaps not surprising that Indonesia and Denmark imposed among the most 
significant restrictions on participating institutions given that their BG programs were the 
only ones that were voluntary. 
In at least one case, the absence of other restrictions seems to have resulted in increased 
risk-taking by institutions. In Korea, policymakers did not set an interest rate cap on deposits 
and weak banks began offering higher rates to attract deposits.  As discussed in Key Design 
Decision No. 9, Eligible Liabilities, this ultimately caused authorities to exclude excess 
interest from coverage under the guarantee (Baliño and Ubide 1999).  
122
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 23 ---
13. Duration: How long was the BG program intended to last? Did it ultimately end as 
originally scheduled? 
Most authorities intended their BG programs to function only as long as crisis conditions 
persisted. This raises the question of when, and under what conditions, the programs would 
end. Scaling back a BG program prematurely may reaggravate the liquidity pressures 
policymakers intended the program to address. Allowing it to continue too long into the 
chronic phase of the crisis increases the risk of moral hazard. Decisions about when to 
terminate a BG program must balance these considerations. 
Figure 8 indicates both the originally intended and actual durations of the BG programs. 
Given the need to determine when conditions are right to end a BG program, several of the 
programs either did not specify an end date in advance or provided a more general statement 
of intended duration rather than something firm. The potential risk with an open -ended 
approach is that policymakers will ultimately allow the program to remain in place beyond 
the point where it is  no longer necessary. This may have been the case in Finland, where 
banks had stabilized by 1995 but the guarantee remained in place until the end of 1998  
(Borio, Vale, and von Peter 2010). 
  
123
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 24 ---
Figure 8: Intended and Actual Durations 
Case Announcement Date Planned 
Duration Actual Duration 
Replaced 
by Deposit 
Insurance 
Scheme 
Sweden 1992 September 24, 1992 - Approx. 4 years ✓ 
Finland 1992 February 1993 - Approx. 6 years ✓ 
Mexico 1993 
December 30, 1993 & 
December 29, 1994 - Approx. 10 years ✓ 
Jamaica 1997 February 7, 1997 5–7 years Approx. 1.5 years ✓ 
Thailand AFC August 5, 1997 - Approx. 10 years ✓ 
Korea AFC    
✓ 
foreign debt: August 25, 1997 Unclear Unclear 
all deposits: November 19, 1997 3 years 3 years 
merchant bank CP: November 27, 1997 Unclear Approx. 1 year 
Indonesia AFC January 26, 1998 2 years* Approx. 8 years ✓ 
Ecuador 1998 December 1, 1998 - Approx. 2 years (trade lines) 
Approx. 6 years (deposits) ✓ 
Ireland GFC September 30, 2008 2 years 2 years ✓ 
Denmark GFC October 5, 2008 2 years 2 years ✓ 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
All BG programs ultimately gave way to permanent, but more limited, deposit insurance  
schemes. As shown in Figure 8, while some of these deposit insurance schemes pre -dated 
the BG program in question, in most instances authorities specifically adopted such schemes 
as a means of replacing the BG programs. Similarly, the AG programs we studied in our  
earlier series typically evolved into permanent deposit insurance schemes. Kane and 
Klingebiel (2004) noted that one of the biggest challenges in introducing a blanket guarantee 
is how to then cut it back. A sudden shift from the full guarantee provided b y a BG program 
to a far less expansive guarantee  could be destabilizing. For that reason , several of the BG 
programs employed a phased approach to move away from a blanket guarantee. This 
typically involved a series of pre -defined points at which the amoun t of coverage provided 
or the liabilities that were eligible for coverage would be scaled back until the desired non -
crisis level of coverage was reached.   
  
124
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 25 ---
Conclusion 
This paper surveys 13 Key Design Decisions for 10 BG programs. A comparison of these 
programs highlights several important themes for policymakers to consider in developing 
any BG program. 
BG programs cannot address underlying problems with in financial systems and 
typically must be part of a comprehensive liquidity support and restructuring package 
to be successful. The BG programs studied produced mixed results in terms of their ability 
to reverse or prevent creditor runs. Some programs appear to have been successful in 
restoring creditor confidence as rep orted by authorities or as gauged by the emergency 
liquidity usage proxy used by researchers such as Laeven and Valencia (2008) and Kane and 
Klingebiel (2004). Other programs seem to have had less effect on confidence because they 
were combined with counte rproductive policies (Ecuador), were not credible given their 
size relative to fiscal resources (Ecuador, Ireland , Thailand), or had to contend with foreign 
exchange pressures ( Ecuador, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, and Thailand). As Laeven and 
Valencia (2008) highlight, even in successful cases, the specific impact of the BG program can 
be difficult to isolate. It seems clear that in order for a BG program to play a meaningful role 
in responding to a crisis, it must be part of a comprehensive restructuring pac kage that 
addresses the underlying causes of the loss of confidence that prompted the need for a 
guarantee. This package may include recapitalizations or asset transfers intended to reduce 
uncertainty about institutions’ continued solvency.  
For BG programs to be effective, they must be credible, particularly as related to the 
amount of liabilities guaranteed relative to fiscal resources . To be successful, 
guarantees of any type must make creditors confident that they will have full and prompt 
access to their guaranteed funds (see McNamara, Feldberg, et al. 2020; McNamara, Kulam, et 
al. 2022). Particularly given the expansiveness of BG programs relative to most AG and DG 
programs, the amount of liabilities covered relative to the fiscal resources of t he guarantor 
can be important in determining the credibility of a BG program . In cases such as Ecuador , 
Ireland, and Thailand, questions about the ability of the state to actually make good on its 
guarantee hindered the effectiveness of BG programs. As the  Irish example illustrates, a 
blanket guarantee  that is too large relative to fiscal resources can also end up placing 
enormous strain on national budgets. On the flip side,  where countries are able to 
demonstrate that their BG programs work as intended, c redibility and creditor confidence 
improve over time as was the case in Indonesia and Thailand.    
Policymakers can address the moral hazard concerns associated with BG programs by 
restricting banks’ behavior during the acute phase of a crisis —for example, through 
interest-rate caps or bans on aggressive marketing —and promising to increase 
official supervisory oversight as the crisis extends into its chronic phase. As with AG 
programs (see  McNamara, Kulam, et al.  2022), c ritics of BG programs continue to raise 
concerns about the possibility that such programs will encourage greater risk -taking by 
financial institutions freed from the market discipline that they believe non-guaranteed 
creditors can provide. The unlimited guarantees associated with BG programs face particular 
criticism from a moral hazard perspective  (Anginer and Demirgüç-Kunt 2018). Among the 
125
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 26 ---
BG programs studied there seems to have been some evidence of increased risk -taking. In 
Indonesia, banks made large loans to affiliates  (Mcleod 2006). In Mexico, banks engaged in 
significant lending to insiders, resulting in higher rates of default and lower collateral 
recovery rates (Haber 2008). However, when facing runs on banks, authorities should not 
pursue policies to mitigate moral hazard—like executive compensation restrictions —that 
could discourage banks from participating in programs that address systemwide liquidity.  
During the acute phase of crises, institutions are focused on survival . Creditor runs are an 
inefficient and potentially disastrous way of promoting market discipline. On the other hand, 
governments in our BG cases have used various tools to prevent banks from taking 
advantage of blanket guarantees to compete aggressively for depositors, a moral hazard risk 
that also rai ses banks’ costs of funding at a bad time. Interest -rate caps, for example, can 
address moral hazard while also lowering the potential cost to taxpayers of bailouts or 
depositor payouts if some banks fail. Such policies are also aimed at creditors’ incenti ves—
they seek to avoid giving creditors an incentive to transfer funds from one bank to another  
during the acute phase of the crisis, which is obviously a zero -sum game and can create 
externalities. As crises shift to the chronic phase, heightened supervision of institutions 
covered by expanded guarantees is a means for addressing the risk that such institutions will 
engage in riskier lending as a result . This requires, however, that the jurisdictions 
implementing blanket guarantees have the capacity to provide that heightened supervision, 
which was not always the case among the BG programs.  
Policymakers should prioritize effective communication when describing BG 
programs. The point of guarantees is to restore creditor confidence . They cannot be 
effective if creditors do not know they exist or understand how they are intended to work.  
Because BG programs are more expansive than most other types of guarantees —involving 
more types of eligible liabilities and potentially more types of eligible institutions —there 
may be a greater risk of misunderstandings. Communication errors undermined the 
effectiveness of several BG programs in the survey . Arguably more so than other types of 
crisis interventions, BG programs require care not only in how programs are designed, but 
also in how information about them is conveyed to markets and the public.  
Clear political support is essential. BG programs entail potentially substantial fiscal costs, 
which authorities may be unable to quantify at the time of their announcement. In Sweden, 
authorities used a joint announcement with the political opposition to unveil the cou ntry’s 
BG program. This appears to have contributed to the BG program’s strong credibility. On the 
flip side, the lack of political unity can create additional obstacles to a successful BG program. 
Political turmoil in Ecuador, Indonesia, and Thailand hurt those countries’ BG programs. 
 
 
   
126
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 27 ---
Glossary  
AG: Account guarantee 
BG: Blanket guarantee 
CIFS: Credit Institutions Financial Support Scheme (Ireland) 
DG: Bank debt guarantee 
DGS: Deposit Guarantee Scheme (Ireland) 
EU: European Union 
FDIF: Financial Institution Development Fund (Thailand) 
FINSAC: Financial Sector Adjustment Company (Jamaica) 
FOBAPROA: Fondo Bancario de Protección al Ahorro (Mexico) 
FSC: Financial Stability Company (Denmark) 
GGF: Government Guarantee Fund (Finland) 
GGS: General Guarantee Scheme (Denmark) 
IBRA: Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency (Indonesia) 
IMF: International Monetary Fund 
KDIC: Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation (Korea) 
PCA: Private Contingency Association (Denmark) 
 
  
127
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 28 ---
References  
Agence France Presse. 1997. “South Korean Trust Funds Swamped with Panic Withdrawals.” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/22060/ 
Anginer, Deniz, and Asli Demirgüç -Kunt. 2018. “Bank Runs and Moral Hazard: A Review of 
Deposit Insurance.” World Bank Policy Research Wor king Papers  8589 (September). 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-runs-and-moral-hazard-review-deposit-insurance 
Baliño, Tomás J. T., and Angel Ubide . 1999. “The Korean Financial Crisis of 1997: A Strategy 
of Financial Sector Reform.” International Monetary Fund Working Papers  99, no. 28. 
https://doi.org/10.5089/9781451844641.001 
Baudino, Patrizia, Diarmuid Murphy, and Jean-Philippe Svoronos. 2020. “The Banking Crisis 
in Ireland.” Financial Stability Institute Crisis Management Series, No. 2 . 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/17398 
Beckerman, Paul, and Andrés Solimano, eds. 2002. Crisis and Dollarization in Ecuador: 
Stability, Growth, and Social Equity. Washington, DC.: The World Bank.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/22127/ 
Bonnick, Gladstone. 1998. “Storm in a Teacup or Crisis in Jamaica’s Financial Sector.” St. 
Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago: Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/storm-teacup-or-crisis-jamaicas-financial-sector 
Borio, Claudio, Bent Vale, and Goetz von Peter. 2010. “Resolving the Financial Crisis: Are We 
Heeding the Lessons from the Nordics?” BIS Working Paper 311.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/21518 
Decker, Bailey. 2022a. “Ecuador: Blanket Guarantee, 1998.” Journal of Financial Crises  4,  
no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/7/ 
———. 2022b. “Korea: Blanket Guarantee, AFC.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/12/ 
Drees, Burkhard, and Ceyla Pazarbasioglu. 1995. “The Nordic Banking Crises: Pitfalls in 
Financial Liberalization?” IMF Working Papers 95, no. 61.  
https://doi.org/10.5089/9781451848113.001 
Edmonds, Timothy. 2015. “Banking Crises: Lessons from Sweden and Norway.” Standard 
Note: SN/BT/4870 February 2, 2015.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/21526 
Englund, Peter. 2015. “The Swedish 1990s Banking Crisis: A Revisit in the Light of R ecent 
Experience.” Conference paper presented at Riksbank Macroprudential Conference, 
Stockholm. June 23-24, 2015.   
128
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 29 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/swedish-1990s-banking-crisis-revisit-light-recent-
experience 
Enoch, Charles. 2000. “Interventions in Bank s During Banking Crises: The Experience of 
Indonesia.” Policy Discussion Paper PDP/00/2. International Monetary Fund.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/16273 
Enoch, Charles, Barbara Baldwin, Olivier Frécaut, and Arto Kovanen. 2001. “Indonesia: 
Anatomy of a B anking Crisis ; Two Years of Living Dangerously 1997 –99.” WP/01/52. 
International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/indonesia-anatomy-banking-crisis-two-years-living-
dangerously-1997-99 
European Central Bank  (ECB). 2008. “Opinion of the Eur opean Central Bank of 3 October 
2008.” Opinion CON/2008/44. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/22038 
George, Ayodeji. 2022a. “Jamaica: FINSAC Blanket Guarantee, 1997.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/11/ 
———. 2022b. “Indonesia: IBRA Blanket Guarantee, 1998.” Journal of Financial Crises  4,  
no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/9/ 
———. 2022c. “Thailand: FIDF Blanket Guarantee, 1997.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/15/ 
Haber, Stephen. 2005. “Mexico’s Experiments with Bank Privatization and Liberalization, 
1991–2003.” Journal of Banking and Finance 29, nos. 8–9: 2325–53.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3284/ 
———. 2008. “Banking with and without Deposit Insurance: Mexico’s Banking Experiments, 
1884–2004.” In Deposit Insurance around the World , edited by Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Edward 
J. Kane, and Luc Laeven, 219–52. Cambridge: The MIT Press.  
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262042543.003.0006 
Hoffner, Benjamin. 2022. “Denmark: General Guarantee Scheme, 2008.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/6/ 
International Association of Deposit Insurers  (IADI). 2012. “Transitioning from a Blanket 
Guarantee or Extending Coverage to a Limited Coverage System.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/transitioning-blanket-guarantee-or-
extending-coverage-limited-coverage-system 
129
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 30 ---
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2000. “Ecuador: Selected Issues and Statistical Annex.” 
IMF Staff Country Reports 2000 (125).   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/22124/ 
———. 2012. “Ireland: 2012 Article IV and Seventh Review Under the Extended 
Arrangement-Staff Report; Informational Annex, Staff Supplement; and Public Information 
Notice.” IMF Country Report No. 12/264. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/22032 
Jácome H., Luis Ignacio. 2004. “The Late 1990s Financial Crisis in Ecuador: Institutional 
Weaknesses, Fiscal Rigidities, and Financial Dollarization at Work.” International Monetary 
Fund Working Paper No. 04/12.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/22125/ 
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2013. “When Credit Bites Back.” Journal 
of Money, Credit and Banking 45, s2: 3–28.   
https://doi.org/10.1111/jmcb.12069 
Kane, Edward J., and Daniela Klingebiel. 2004. “Alternatives to Blanket Guarantees for 
Containing a Systemic Crisis.” Journal of Financial Stability 1, no, 1: 31–63.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2004.06.002 
Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation (KDIC). 2001. “Annual Report 2000.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/korea-deposit-insurance-corporation-annual-report-
2000 
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2008. “The Use of Blanket Guarantees in Banking Crises” 
International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 08/250 (October).  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/21517/ 
Lundgren, Bo. 2009. “Testimony of Bo Lundgren, Director General, Swedish National Debt 
Office.” Congressional Oversight Panel, Washington, DC, March 19, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/2869 
Makhija, Anmol. 2022 a. “Finland: Government Guarantee Fund, Blanket Guarantee, 1992.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/8/ 
———. 2022b. “Sweden: Bank Support Authority, Blanket Guarantee, 1992.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/14/ 
Mcleod, Ross H. 2006. “Indonesia’s New Deposit Guarantee Law.” Bulletin of Indonesian 
Economic Studies 42, no. 1: 59–78.   
https://doi.org/10.1080/00074910600632377 
130
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 31 ---
McNamara, Christian, Greg Feldberg, David Tam, and Andrew Metrick. 2020. “Bank Debt 
Guarantee Programs.” Journal of Financial Crises 2, no. 3: 71–100.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol2/iss3/26/ 
McNamara, Christian, Adam Kulam, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2022. “Account 
Guarantee Survey.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/2 
Nabi, Ijaz, and Jayasankar Shivakumar. 2001. “Back from the Brink: Thailand’s Response to 
the 1997 Economic Crisis.” Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/back-brink-thailands-response-1997-economic-crisis 
Nyberg, Peter, and Vesa Vihriälä. 1994. “The Finnish Banking Crisis and Its Handling.” Bank 
of Finland Discussion Papers, April.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/finnish-banking-crisis-and-its-handling-update-
developments-through-1993 
Santiprabhob, Veerathai. 2003. Lessons Learned from Thailand’s Experience with Financial -
Sector Restructuring. Bangkok, Thailand: Thailand Development Research Institute.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lessons-learned-thailands-experience-financial-sector-
restructuring 
Schaefer-Brown, Stella. 2022a. “Ireland: Credit Institution (Financial Support) Scheme, 
2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/10/ 
———. 2022b. “Mexico: FOBAPROA Blanket Guarantee, 1993.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, 
no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/13/ 
Sharma, Shalendra D. 2013. “Thailand: Crisis, Reform and Recovery.” In The Asian Financial 
Crisis: Crisis, Reform and Recovery. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-crisis-reform-and-recovery 
Woll, Cornelia. 2014. The Power of Inaction: Bank Bailouts in Comparison . Series: Cornell 
Studies in Political Economy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/power-inaction-bank-bailouts-comparison 
World Bank. 1995. “Report and Recommendation of the President of the International Bank 
for Reconstructi on and Development on a Proposed Loan to Nacional Financiera, S.N.C.” 
Proposal 9-6616-ME. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/report-and-recommendation-president-international-
bank-reconstruction-and-development-1 
———. 1998. “Implementation Completion Report: Mexico Financial Sector Restructuring 
Loan [Loan 3911-ME].” Report No. 18012.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/22080/ 
131
Blanket Guarantees McNamara et al.

--- Page 32 ---
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive  
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
132
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4