--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Andrew Gray Lessons Learned: Andrew Gray 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2022) "Lessons Learned: Andrew Gray," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 4, 
613-616. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1466 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/30 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss4/30

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Andrew Gray 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Andrew Gray joined the FDIC in 2007, after having been majority director of communications 
for the US Senate Committee on Banking, Housing , and Urban Affairs and press secretary for 
US Senator Richard C. Shelby ( R–AL). Gray’s initial project was a camp aign to mark the 75th 
anniversary of the creation of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC); his role  
evolved into running crisis communications as the FDIC stepped in during several bank failures 
triggered by the Global Financial Crisis  (GFC) and conducted  489 bank resolutions during 
2008–2013. After the crisis, the FDIC also assumed new responsibilities over the winding down 
of failing banks under the Dodd -Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. This 
Lessons Learned is based on an interview with  Gray held in October 2021 ; the full transcript 
may be accessed here. 
Identify the worst-case scenario s and develop a plan that includes procuring the 
resources you will need to counter them because unexpected events will happen. 
In early 2008, the developing crisis revealed itself to the FDIC  through a series of  notable 
bank failures , including that of IndyMac. Before this period , Gray says that there was a 
“failure of imagination” when it came to thinking ahead to what could go wrong with the 
economy in freefall. Gray recalls, “we were coming from . . . what they called the golden age 
of banking. At the FDIC in particular , there hadn ’t been a bank failure in at least a couple 
years, if not three years.” 
The FDIC did not have a concrete crisis communications plan, so when the crisis ramped up, 
it was understaffed and short on resources to respond to mounting inquiries regarding the 
bank failures. Eventually, the FDIC added more resources throughout the agency as the crisis 
wore on and also developed a crisis communications plan. Gray says, 
We added employees, especially in the Division of Resolution and Receiverships, as 
you would imagine, to help staff bank failures because there were so many of them at 
the height. We were looking at 10 or 11 every Friday. We had to grow into being able 
to handle these additional responsibilities too, so we created a whole new division 
just devoted to it and put a really smart guy in charge. They started that hard work of 
figuring out what they would have to do. My part of that was developing a crisis 
communication plan, having a template for how we would communicate one of these 
failures and being very explicit that it truly was a managed bankruptcy process. 
In the crisis communications plan, the FDIC stressed that bank failures were being resolved 
through the bankruptcy process, where the shareholders ’ equity would be extinguished 
while the depositors were protected by the agency.  But perhaps because a negative 
impression had been left by the FDIC ’s deferred crisis messaging, a persistent public 
narrative remained that the bankers were rescued at the ex pense of the depositors and 
taxpayers remained.  
613

--- Page 4 ---
Gray says, 
We could have done better just thinking  [about], where are we seeing trouble, 
potential issues in the economy, what could that lead to, and are we ahead of it. Really 
thinking through that and , if we know every piece of the financial structure, to 
examine the vulnerabilities. 
Even in today’s polarized climate, it’s important to share information.  
Gray came to the FDIC following a generally cooperative experience  in Congress. “I worked 
for a boss who’s sort of legendary, ” he explained. Sen ator Richard Shelby was originally a 
Democrat who became a Republican and was known to work both sides of the aisle.  Having 
that experience on the Hill was helpful, Gray explains. 
There were agendas on every side that had nothing to do with our ability to execute 
on our remit, that had to do with other people. Understanding that and how we could 
best combat that was really helpful. 
Divisiveness on the regulatory side came in the form of fragmentation of author ity, which 
led to communications hurdles, Gray explains.  
It was very parochial in terms of how the Fed has the non -state banks that they 
primarily supervise. The OCC had the national banks. FDIC has the state banks, along 
with the state bank supervisors. But it was really stovepiped, so we didn’t share a lot 
of information until things were too late. We had a lot of things that were just dumped 
on our lap on a Thursday. I don’t know how you would have improved that, absent of 
crisis, but that was another thing that needed to be addressed. 
Education is often the antidote to uncertainty, so t o the extent that you can,  let the 
public witness the inner wo rkings of  your agency  in action  through a n established 
channel for public communication. 
Communications with customers of failing banks was not very strong during the initial onset 
of the crisis. Sheila Bair , FDIC head  at the time , and her team valued transparency and 
provided guidance through traditional agency communication channels . Yet there were 
instances where the FDIC’s effort to orchestrate an orderly transition of bank operation was 
completely overshadowed by other narratives in the public sphe re. In the case of the 
IndyMac failure, a creatively produced video began circulating in the media that suggested 
the bank’s acquisition would be at the expense of its depositors. In response, the FDIC issued 
a press release with a point -by-point rebuttal; however, it only served to amplify the initial 
video.  
It seemed as though some of IndyMac’s customers were unaware of protections afforded to 
them by virtue of deposit insurance. This is evidenced by customers exhibiting behavior akin 
to a bank run. Gray recounts, 
614
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
[I]t’s sort of a famous story . . . that Friday, we closed the bank early, and that allowed 
time for customers to go to the bank, hear that it was closed, see the thing that said 
bank failed, and the press release that we put on the window. [Soon, the customers] 
were at the doors like this, and CNN had a camera out there quickly because they were 
starting to really cover the bank failures too. These frightened customers whose bank 
just failed, it’s the first time they probably experienced something like that. So, these 
visuals ran over the course of the weekend, and there was this mass hysteria of their 
customers thinking that they were going to lose their money. The vast majority was 
fully protected by the FDIC’s insurance limits. 
Fortunately, the FDIC, having recently prepared a communications campaign to mark the 
agency’s 75 th anniversary in 2008,  had a large amount of research ready  for the public 
describing its mission and explaining how it operates. This proved helpful in briefing 
stakeholders on what the agency could and could not do based on its remit. Gray explains,  
I look back on that , and it was really important that we had done that work around 
really basic messaging: “You know, in our 75 -year history , no one has ever lost a  
penny of insured deposits. ” Just simple catchy stuff that we developed into various 
forms of collateral. 
[I]n the evolution of that campaign, the anniversary campaign, we did a big, broad 
public education campaign. We were in six or seven cities: San Francisco, Kansas City, 
Chicago—these are all cities where we had big FDIC field offices—New York City and 
a couple more. We would do a public event. We rang the bell at the New York Stock 
Exchange, and it had our 75 th anniversary logo on it. We would invite l ocal crowds, 
and we’d always make sure that we did a lot of media around it to hel p. . . . We had 
billboards and just had a lot of really cool exposure for this campaign. So, it just 
continued [in]to this cycle of public education. 
As part of the anniversary coverage, the FDIC had also given the Wall Street Journal access to 
observe the process of unwinding a bank  before the crisis, in order to demystify what it 
means when a bank fails.  Later in the crisis, the FDIC gave 60 Minutes access to the process 
at a bank in rural Minnesota as part of a profile of Bair.   
[M]y job was to walk in and tell the employees, the people that are gathered, that not 
only that happened , but there are camera crews from 60 Minutes here to film your 
bank failure. I’ve had bad looks before, but there were people that would have very 
happily punched me in the face. And so, I was just: “Please just think about it as this 
is for the public good, for people to understand it. I know it’s intrusive. I’m sorry.” 
Thanks to that effort, the feature was so successful that the FDIC used it as an educational 
tool and referred to it frequently to help explain what happens when a bank fails.  
I really do think that that helped so much, because of what we [the FDIC] were all 
worried about: that trust in financial institutions  is so tenuous. In your bank —that 
trust that your money’s going to be safe —if that erodes, then that really would have 
been something that would ’ve been hard to recover from during the crisis. But 
615
Lessons Learned: Andrew Gray Cardona

--- Page 6 ---
somehow it maintained, and we never had an issue with liquidity runs on banks that 
were otherwise healthy. 
Dated: December 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2021–35 
 
616
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4