--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Deborah Perelmuter Lessons Learned: Deborah Perelmuter 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2022) "Lessons Learned: Deborah Perelmuter," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : 
Iss. 4, 630-632. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1470 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/34 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss4/34

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Deborah Perelmuter 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Deborah Perelmuter has spent more than three decades with the Federal Reserve System . In 
2008, as senior vice president at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) and co-head 
of Capital Markets Analysis and Trading (CMAT) within the Markets Group, she was tasked with 
setting up the operational details of the Term Securities Lending Facility  (TSLF). The TSLF 
auctioned Treasury securities to primary dealers  in exchange for less liquid colla teral to 
provide liquidity to those firms during the Global Financial Crisis of 200 7–2009. Perelmuter 
became senior financial stability adviser within the office of the director in the FRBNY’s 
Research and Statistics Group . In January 2010, she was appointed to a new position in the 
FRBNY Communications Group, charged with improving the bank ’s overall communications 
and transparency. This Lesson Learned is based on an interview with Perelmuter that occurred 
on March 24, 2021; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
The appearance of distress can hurt institutions, even as they are trying to right the 
ship. Regulators need to offer assistance in a way that avoids stigma.  
The Federal Reserve had set up facilities to manage liquidity and stabilize financial markets 
in anticipation of Y2K disruptions after calendars switched to the new millennium on 
January 1, 2000. Although they were not used, some of those facilities were activated later, 
when the markets were roiled by the terrorist attacks of Sept ember 11, 2001. However, 
many institutions were reluctant to tap the Fed ’s discount window when the housing 
downturn began to affect them, fear ing they’d damage their ability to go to the market for 
funding.  
When banks go to the Fed’s discount window, it can create the impression that they are not 
a good credit risk. Perelmuter observes,  
What we were trying to do at the Fed was encourage banks to borrow, saying: “It’s 
here, come and borrow.” Instead, they were willing to pay rates much higher than the 
market rate, say 10%, 12%, and more in the market, because they didn’t want to come 
to the Fed to borrow. We did not announce the names of banks who borrowed, but 
the numbers would show if anyone did. There would be a blip up from zero borrowing 
to maybe $20 million in borrowing to $300 million in borrowings. Everybody would 
try to fish around and figure out who that was. It wasn’t a good feeling for anybody. 
The Fed needed to send money out into the banking system to maintain liquidity without 
adding to reserves and causing other problems in the financial system. The Term Auction 
Facility (TAF) was meant to encourage banks to borrow by structuring the program as a n 
auction for what were essentially discount window loans. It was an exercise in managing 
stigma and risk perception, Perelmuter explains.  
630

--- Page 4 ---
It was really an interesting psychological, sociological experiment, because we were 
lending the same—collateralized funding to banks, albeit for term v ersus overnight. 
These were the same loans, but we were putting it out in an auction-style format, 
saying: “Hey, everybody come.” So, a lot of banks would come and borrow from that, 
but it was seen more as: “This is another way to get funds.” We were able to turn the 
discount window into something that was positive rather than negative. 
It can take a while for new ideas to be understood. Keep pushing and explaining your 
ideas as long as it takes.  
Perelmuter started talking up the idea of the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) in early 
2008, even before Bear Stearns reached critical stage. But the idea failed to get traction at 
several meetings, until she reached out to the vice chairman of the Board of Governors.  
I tried to push it, but it kept getting put lower on the priori ty scale given everything 
else going on. We were all in this small group that met with [then-president of the 
FRBNY Tim] Geithner every morning, and maybe it was complicated and didn’t solve 
immediate problems. 
I was down at the Board of Governors in Washington for another meeting, and I knew 
the vice chairman at that time. I knew him back when he was head of Monetary Affairs. 
We had a good relationship, so I just asked if I could go to see him. I went, and I told 
him about this TSLF idea, and he said that he now understood it better. He then would 
talk to other people on the committee and talk to Tim Geithner. I brought it up again, 
and they said: “Now put together some term sheets . Put together how you think it 
would work, and we’ll present it to the FOMC [Federal Open Market Committee].”  
Continue the task of communicating and promoting transparency around your 
actions, even if there is no crisis in sight.  
At the height of the crisis, there was no time to spend on communicating, other than around 
the many facilities that were being launche d and issues directly related to saving the 
financial system . That may have contributed to the impression that the regulators were 
focused only on helping the financial system at the expense of the public.  
I would hear in my own house —“Hey, Fed, you’re saving Wall Street, but you’re not 
saving Main Street.” I thought it was really lost that the Fed generally does its business 
through Wall Street banks, and Wall Street banks then make things available to Main 
Street.  
Those attitudes also ignored that commercial paper helps Main Street business operate and 
pay their workers, which keeps  the economy going. But that message was not getting 
through. Perelmuter said: 
I thought it was important , once all this died down, to explain this to anybody who 
would listen . Believe me, I talked to everybody about how Wall Street then could 
translate to Main Street and that these were actually set up to make sure that Main 
631
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
Street could then be able to do what they needed to do to stay in business. Because 
Main Street can’t exist without banks, and the banks can’t exist without liquidity. 
After the crisi s was quelled, Perelmuter took on a communications role at the F RBNY and 
worked to explain the Wall Street–Main Street nexus and the Fed’s personalities and tools to 
a wide range of parties. “I would explain to professors. I’d explain to students. I’d explain to 
businesspeople. To a lot of naysayers. ” She was instrumental in the F RBNY evolving its 
communications tactics to invite the press in more often and to have more briefings. .  
Dated: December 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2020–32 
 
632
Lessons Learned: Deborah Perelmuter Cardona