--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 2 
2022 
Hong Kong: Temporary Liquidity Measures, 2008 Hong Kong: Temporary Liquidity Measures, 2008 
Benjamin Hoffner 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Hoffner, Benjamin (2022) "Hong Kong: Temporary Liquidity Measures, 2008," Journal of Financial Crises: 
Vol. 4 : Iss. 2, 897-919. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1330 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/41 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss2/41

--- Page 3 ---
Hong Kong: Temporary Liquidity Measures, 20081 
Benjamin Hoffner2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
July 15, 2022 
Abstract 
In September 2008, Hong Kong’s interbank market tightened after the Bank of East Asia 
experienced a deposit run, prompting the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) to roll out 
five novel liquidity measures. The first three of these measures expanded the sco pe of 
HKMA’s discount window, offering term loans of up to three months, accepting additional 
collateral options, and lowering the rate charged. In the last two measures, the HKMA created 
one facility that allowed banks to request foreign exchange swaps an d another that 
permitted the HKMA to extend collateralized term loans at market rates using its discretion. 
Although these measures lasted only six months, the HKMA later decided to incorporate the 
discretionary term lending and forex swap facilities into its permanent monetary policy 
framework. It allowed discount window lending to revert to its original terms. The HKMA 
cited greater activity under the discretionary facilities compared to the enhanced discount 
window as cause for the change in exit strateg y. Moreover, during the six -month tenure of 
the enhanced discount window, banks did not use two of the three enhancements, namely 
the longer loan terms and expanded collateral options. 
Keywords: broad-based emergency liquidity, currency board, discount win dow, HKMA, 
Hong Kong   
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering broad -based emergency lending programs. Cases are available from the Journal of 
Financial Crises at   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
897

--- Page 4 ---
Overview 
During the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–09, 
fears about the worsening macroeconomic 
prospects bled into Hong Kong money 
markets. In the summer of 2008, term 
HIBORs (Hong Kong Interbank Offer Rates, 
the benchmark interbank interest rates) and 
later, overnight rates , increased (HKMA, 
2008, 46). Meanwhile, the unwinding of carry 
trades, the repatriation of funds into Hong 
Kong, and a flight to safer currency markets 
increased dema nd for Hong Kong dollar 
(HKD)3 liquidity (HKMA 2008i) . The 
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on 
September 15 sent interbank interest rates 
climbing as worries about counterparty 
credit risks discouraged banks from lending 
(HKMA, 2008, 47).  
The resulting tigh tening in the interbank 
markets prompted the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority (HKMA) to buy HKD 1.56 billion 
worth of US dollars on September 18—about 
USD 0.2 billion—to keep the HKD within its 
target zone, expanding the Aggregate Balance 
of banks’ HKD reserves (HKMA 2008g).  
On September 24, panic struck depositors at 
the Bank of East Asia, Hong Kong’s fifth 
largest bank, after a series of rumors spread 
via text message concerning the bank’s 
solvency (Bruner, 2008, 1). Though 
unsubstantiated, these rumors led depositors 
to withdraw HK D 2 billion from the bank by 
the next day, exemplifying a small -scale run. 
The HKMA subsequently injected HK D 3.9 
billion on September 25 through another 
round of intra -zone foreign exchange 
operations (HKMA, 2008, 47). Although th e overnight HIBOR began to ease shortly 
thereafter, term HIBORs continued to rise.  
 
3 Hong Kong has a linked exchange rate system which allows the Hong Kong dollar (HKD) to fluctuate within a 
tight range of HKD 7.75 to HKD 7.85 per US dollar (USD) (BIS 2019). The credibility of the HKD -USD link 
increases demand for HKD during flights to quality, such as in 2008 (Yam 2009). 
Key Terms 
Purpose: “To increase the supply of liquidity and 
reduce borrowing costs to relieve stress in the 
money market and help restore the normal 
functioning of the interbank market” (HKMA 2008i)  
Launch Dates Announcement: Sept. 30, 2008 
Operational: Oct. 2, 2008 
Expiration Dates March 31, 2009 
Legal Authority  Exchange Fund Ordinance 
Peak Outstanding HKD 11.4 billion in Oct. 2008 
for combined temporary 
measures 
Participants Licensed banks in Hong Kong 
Rate Discount window: Fixed rate 
built off US federal funds 
target 
Discretionary Term Lending: 
Variable rate referenced at 
prevailing market rates 
Collateral Discount window: Exchange 
Fund Paper, US Treasuries 
Discretionary Term Lending: 
not available 
Loan Duration Maturities up to three months 
Notable Features Early roll out in conjunction 
with numerous liquidity 
measures 
Outcomes No apparent usage of extended 
maturities from DW, unknown 
for discretionary term lending 
898
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
In response, on September 30, the HKMA announced five new measures to provide 
temporary liquidity assistance to licensed banks through a combination of new and existing 
facilities. The first three measures enhanced the terms of the existing discount window 
(“enhanced discount window”): 
(1) expanding the eligible collateral to include high-quality US dollar assets; 
(2) extending the maximum borrowing term of liquidity beyond overnight to maturities 
of up to three months; 
(3) reducing the cost of borrowing by waiving the 5% penalty imposed on banks that 
borrowed against more than 50% of their holdings of Exchange Fund paper at the 
discount window (HKMA 2008a).  
The other two measures were discretionary: 
(4) introducing foreign exchange swaps (“forex swap facility”) with maximum 
maturities of three months for the purpose of providing licensed banks with HKD 
liquidity in exchange for US dollars;  
(5) allowing banks to borrow term money for up to one month against high quality 
collateral (“discretionary term lending facility”), priced at market rates (HKMA 
2008c). 
This case will focus on the enhanced discount window and discretionary term lending 
facility, in other words, measures (1-3) and (5), respectively; a future case series will explore 
the foreign exchange component of the HKMA’s emergency liquidity assistance. 
Nevertheless, all relief under these five measures was available to the 145 licensed banks in 
Hong Kong, representing the vast majority of domestic banking activity (HKMA 2008f, 214, 
77).  
The HKMA undertook other steps that interacted with the five temporary measures to 
further facilitate liquidity provision; the most notable of these complementary steps was the 
Base Rate reduction. On October 8, the HKMA reduced the Base Rate, which it used to price 
discount window borrowings, by 100 bps, lowering the cost for banks to obtain liquidity. The 
HKMA also in creased the supply of Exchange Fund paper (government debt similar to US 
Treasuries) beginning with an allotment on October 20 in order to facilitate banks’ collateral 
needs in support of the enhanced discount window and discretionary term lending facility  
(HKMA 2008h). The timing of Exchange Fund paper issuance strategically coincided with 
intra-zone foreign exchange operations—the excess HK dollars injected into banks’ reserves 
were mopped up by the additional supply of highly -liquid Exchange Fund bills (HKMA 
2009e).  
When introduced, both the five temporary liquidity measures and the Base Rate adjustment 
were set to expire after six months, at the end of March 2009 (HKMA 2008c; HKMA 2008b). 
The only noted changes to the five temporary measures  were amendments to  the 
discretionary term lending facility in November 2008, adding three -month secured loans 
899
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 6 ---
and scope for charging below -market interest rates (HKMA 2008e). Ultimately, the HKMA 
allowed the five temporary measures and the revised Base Rate to expire  in March 2009. 
However, the HKMA decided to establish a permanent forex swap facility and discretionary 
term lending facilities as part of its permanent policy framework. It noted that most of the 
usage of the five temporary measures had been confined to those two measures (HKMA 
2009b).  
Overall, the HKMA said that the outstanding liquidity provided through the five measures 
was small in the fourth quarter of 2008 and reached a maximum of HK D 11.4 billion in 
October, declining to HKD 6.1 billion by the year’s end. It did not say how much banks used 
each of the measures. However, based on periodical discount window data the HKMA 
released, it does not appear that banks took advantage of the first two temporary measures 
at all. Every discount window liquidity injection was followed by a reversal the next day, 
indicating the HKMA extended no term loans (API 2007 –2009). Banks also did not take 
advantage of the broader collateral the HKMA allowed, only posting Exchange Fund paper 
during this period (HKMA 2009e; HKMA 2009f; HKMA 2009g).  
Meanwhile, the HKMA injected far more liquidity into the banking system in the fourth 
quarter of 2008 through its foreign exchange operations —a total of HK D 182.8 billion, 
representing purchases of US dollars. While most of that figure represents passive US dollar 
purchases to maintain the currency peg, it also includes HK D 24.8 billion in US dollars that 
the HKMA injected to provide liquidity to banks (HKMA 2008i).  
The HKMA disclosed data on the aggregate usage of the discount window during this period 
(Figure 1). 4 Such aggregate disclosures did not separate the regular, overnight operations 
from the enhanced lending operations. However, there is no need to isolate the enhanced 
operations since two of the thre e discount window enhancements (the extended term and 
expanded collateral) were never used; compared to nominal discount window operations, 
usage of the facility reflected an overall lower borrowing cost resulting from the third 
enhancement and the Base Ra te reduction (HKMA 2008a; HKMA 2008h) . During the six 
months that the enhanced terms were available, total discount window borrowing amounted 
to HKD 8.4 billion, compared to HK D 5.5 billion in the preceding six months and HK D 11 
million in the following six months (API 2007–2009). 
  
 
4 The HKMA presents discount window borrowing amounts in terms of net increases in the level interbank 
liquidity, defined as the Aggregate Balance, a component of the monetary base. The Aggregate Balance 
constitutes “the sum of the balances in the clearing accounts maintained by the banks with the HKMA for 
settling interbank payments and payments between banks and the HKMA” (HKMA 2008h).  
900
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1: Daily Changes in the Aggregate Balance Arising from Discount Window 
activities, 2007–09 
 
Source: API 2007–2009. 
Notably, most discount window lending took place at the beginning and end of the temporary 
enhancements. Aggregate discount window  borrowings were HK D 5.6 billion in October 
2008 and HK D 2.6 billion on the last day of March 2009 , but the HKMA lent only HK D 0.1 
billion in the roughly five intervening months (HKMA 2009g; HKMA 2009f). Of the HKD 5.6 
billion borrowing spike in October, only HKD 0.3 billion occurred before the Base Rate 
reduction on October 8, 2008 (API 2007–2009).  
The HKMA also disclosed the number of banks that used the discount window  and the 
frequency of their usage for two periods that imperfectly reference the duration of the 
temporary provisions and the lower Base Rate. In the first period (September 20 to 
November 20, 2008), nine separate banks borrowed from the discount window once, while 
two borrowed three times (HKMA 2009e) . In the second period (November 21, 2008 to 
March 30, 2009), which excludes the very active final day of the six-month period, only four 
banks accessed the Window (HKMA 2009f). 
Summary Evaluation 
Over the six-month term in which the five temporary liquidity measures were available, the 
discount window  experienced two spikes in borrowing activity, one just after the 
implementation of the e nhancements and one just prior to their expiration as shown in 
Figure 1 (API 2007 –2009). However, we found no evidence that the first and second 
measures of the enhanced discount window, offering extended maturities and accepting US 
Treasuries as collatera l, were ever used. Nevertheless, the assurance of longer -term, 
affordable credit given to banks through the enhanced discount window and other measures 
901
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 8 ---
helped ease funding conditions in the interbank market; yields on short -term HIBORs 
decreased corresponding to the introduction of the temporary liquidity measures (Fung and 
Yu 2009; API 2008).  
As seen in Figure 2, HIBORs on overnight, one-week, and one-month declined following the 
announcement of the temporary liquidity measures on September 30 as well as the Base 
Rate reduction on October 8; term HIBORS beyond one-month decreased only after the 
announcement of the new Contingent Bank Capital Facility and full deposit guarantee 
programs on October 14 (Financial Secretary 2008; API 2008).  
Figure 2: Hong Kon g Interbank Interest Rates (HIBOR fixings), September –October 
2008 
 
Note: The dotted thick and thin grey vertical lines indicate the announcement of the five temporary measures 
and Base Rate reduction, respectively.  
Source: API 2008. 
In their statistical analysis on the impact of the five temporary measures, Fung and Yu (2009) 
found that the temporary liquidity support “helped mitigate the dislocations and therefore 
improved the efficiency in the money and FX swap markets,” resulting in banks being “more 
willing to lend in the interbank market .” On the other hand, the temp orary measures, 
including the enhanced discount window, did not have a statistical impact on the easing of 
long-term credit spreads.  
  
902
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
Context: Hong Kong 2008–2009 
GDP 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU  
converted to USD) 
$219.3 billion in 2008 
$214.1 billion in 2009 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, nominal GDP in LCU  
converted to USD) 
$31,516 in 2008 
$30,697 in 2009 
Sovereign credit rating  
(five-year senior debt) 
Data for 2008: 
Moody’s: Aa2 
S&P: AA+ 
Fitch: AA+ 
 
Data for 2009: 
Moody’s: Aa2 
S&P: AA+ 
Fitch: AA+ 
Size of banking system $330.3 billion in 2008 
$374 .4 billion in 2009 
Size of banking system  
as a percentage of GDP 
150.6% in 2008 
174.9% in 2009 
Size of banking system  
as a percentage of financial system 
100% for 2008 
100% for 2009 
Five-bank concentration of banking system 79.5% in 2008  
78.3% in 2009 
Foreign involvement in banking system 91% in 2008 
92% in 2009 
Government ownership of banking system Data not available for 2008 
Data not available for 2009 
Existence of deposit insurance Yes, in 2008 
Yes, in 2009 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; World 
Bank Deposit Insurance Dataset. 
903
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 10 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: The HKMA introduced five temporary measures to improve liquidity in 
the interbank market. 
Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008, market participants 
increased their demand for Hong Kong dollars, which they saw as relatively safe as money 
markets tightened. Facing appreciating pressures on Hong Kong’s fixed exchange rate and 
shortages of HKD liquidity, the HKMA intervened directly in the forex market. After the 
HKMA first injected liquidity on September 18 through large purchases of US dollars, local 
interbank markets remained tight. A deposit run on the Bank of East Asia on September 25 
further disrupted interbank lending (HKMA 2008h).  
On September 30, the HKMA introduced five temporary liquidity measures, effective October 
2, to improve banks’ access to liquidity (HKMA 2009d). These five measures were designed 
“to provide longer term funding for licensed banks against a wider -than-usual range of 
collateral” (HKMA 2008h). The first three measures amended the existing discount window 
while the fourth and fifth measures created new forex swap and discretionary term lending 
facilities. This case focuses on the enhanced discount window  (measures 1 -3) and the 
discretionary term lending facility (measure 5). 
2. Legal Authority: The existing l egal authority assigned to the HKMA provided 
discretionary power to introduce the innovative liquidity tools. 
Under the Exchange Fund Ordinance, the Financial Secretary of Hong Kong has the right to 
set the policy objective for the HKMA. The Financial Secr etary delegates to the HKMA the 
responsibility for achieving these objectives, “including determining the strategy, 
instrument and operational means for doing so” (Financial Secretary 2003). Since 1983, the 
overarching policy objective has been to peg the value of the HKD to the US dollar (USD). 
Under a currency board arrangement, the monetary base is fully backed by USD reserves. 
The HKMA utilizes its Exchange Fund “to maintain the stability and integrity of the monetary 
and financial systems of Hong Kong”  (Legislative Council 1997) . Provided that the HKMA 
honors the currency board arrangements, the HKMA has legal authority to administer 
emergency liquidity support to the banking system via the Exchange Fund when 
circumstances threaten the stability of the monetary or financial systems (HKMA 1999, 77).5 
 
5 In the currency board system, lender of last resort (LOLR) activities follow the convention that Hong Kong 
Dollar liquidity provision is “matched either by a decline in another component of the monetary base (i.e., the 
Exchange Fund paper) or an increase in US dollar assets” (HKMA 1999).  
904
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
3. Part of a Package: The HKMA’s implementation of liquidity tools were supported 
by additional policies, all of which sought to produce confidence in the banking 
system and return the interbank markets to normal functioning. 
In addition to the temporary liquidity measures announced on September 30, the HKMA 
supported banks through intervening (passively and actively) in foreign exchange 
operations, supplying additional Exchange Fund paper (treasuries), lowering  the Base Rate 
for calculating discount window  borrowing costs, and allowing flexibility for capital 
adequacy requirements.  
Foreign exchange operations: In the fourth quarter of 2008, appreciating pressures on the 
HKD triggered automatic exchange mechanis ms6 whereby the HKMA passively sold a total 
of HK D 154 billion in exchange for USD (BIS 2019) . Additionally, the HKMA manually 
intervened through foreign exchange operations by actively selling HKD against USD within 
the convertibility zone to ease HKD liquidity strains (HKMA 2008i). 
Expansion of the Exchange Fund Bills Programme:  The HKMA also issued a total of HK D 12 
billion in additional 7,8 Exchange Fund Bills amidst increased demand for Exchange Fund 
paper that had driven yields below zero (HKMA 2009e; HKMA 2009j).  
Base Rate Reduction: To further enable banks’ access to liquidity via the enhanced discount 
window, the HKMA revised the calculation of the Base Rate formula downward on October 
8, 2008. Effective on October 9, the downward revision lowered the Base Rate calculation’s 
1.5% premium over the Federal Funds Target Rate to 0.5%. Coupled with US Federal Funds 
rate cuts over the quarter, the Base Rate, which determines the discount window  fees, 
declined from 3% at the beginning of October to 0.5% by year end (HKMA 2009e). 
Flexible ca pital adequacy ratio:  The HKMA also lifted the 8% statutory minimum capital 
adequacy ratio applied to all locally incorporated banks on November 21, 2008, to ease 
lending conditions in the interbank market (Legislative Council 2008b). 
Along with HKMA’s eff orts to promote confidence in the banking system, the Financial 
Secretary introduced two new measures on October 14 : (1) the Contingent Bank Capital 
Facility9 and (2) 100% deposit protection to all licensed banks.10  
 
6 Hong Kong’s Linked Exchange Rate System u ses the HKMA’s automatic stabilizers to ensure that the HKD 
stays within a convertibility zone of HKD 7.75 and HKD 7.85 to the USD (BIS 2019).  
7 The HKMA on occasion paired the tap issue of Exchange Fund bills with the within -zone foreign exchange 
operations to partially offset the increase in the Aggregate Balance (HKMA 2009e). 
8 Since banks use Exchange Fund paper as collateral in discount window and discretionary term loan 
borrowings, the issuance complemented the temporary measures rolled out on October  2. 
9 The Contingent Bank Capital Facility provided an opportunity for banks to receive capital injections via the 
Exchange Fund (HKMA 2008h). 
10 Prior to the full guarantee, the Exchange Fund covered up to HKD 100,000 per depositor at licensed banks 
(Legislative Council 2008a). 
905
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 12 ---
4. Management: Banks filed requests to the HKMA who then provided the approved 
funds into participants’ clearing accounts. 
For b oth the enhanced  discount window  and the discretionary term lending facility , the 
HKMA provided liquidity after banks filed requests to  the HKMA’s dealing room that were  
approved upon confirmation of requisite documentation and securities for repurchase 
agreements (repos). The eligible participants for the five temporary measures, all licensed 
banks, maintai ned Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) accounts with the Exchange Fund 
(HKMA 2008d). The RTGS is the interbank payment system whereby licensed banks hold 
clearing accounts with the HKMA (HKMA 2008i). Through the RTGS, the HKMA provided 
liquidity to the clearin g accounts of these banks, increasing the Aggregate Balance. While 
RTGS facilitated currency transfers, the HKMA used the Central Money Markers Unit 
payment system to manage the collateral side of the liquidity transactions (HKMA 2009c).  
5. Administration: The HKMA administered all liquidity assistance offered through 
the temporary measures. 
Consistent with the LOLR arrangements and the existing monetary policy framework, the 
HKMA operated and supervised  the new measures for liquidity provision (HKMA 2009c). 
For the enhanced discount window , t he HKMA reserved the right to obtain additional 
information from banks “to reduce possible abuse” of discount window borrowings (HKMA 
2008d). 
6. Eligible Participants: The HKMA opened the temporary liquidity measures to all 
licensed banks. 
The HKMA supervises a three-tier banking system, which, in 2008, consisted of 145 licensed 
banks, 27 restricted license banks (generally merchant banks), and 28 deposit -taking 
companies with a limited scope, collectively termed “authorized institutions” (HKMA 2008f). 
Licensed banks, the eligible participants for liquidity assistance, represent most of the 
financial activity among authorized institutions, providing 97% of the loans and receiving 
99% of deposits in 2008 (HKMA 2008i).  
In a Leg islative Council panel on November 21, 2008, the Chief Executive of the HKMA, 
Joseph Yam, provided additional information about the types of licensed banks receiving 
most of the liquidity assistance from the new measures. Yam noted that liquidity to date was 
“mainly targeted at Hong Kong branches of foreign banks without a deposit base in Hong 
Kong and also local banks” (Legislative Council 2008b). At the time, 122 of the 145 licensed 
banks were foreign, domiciled outside of Hong Kong (HKMA 2008i). 
7. Funding Source: The Hong Kong dollar liquidity provided through the five 
temporary liquidity measures used the Exchange Fund.  
As noted previously, the HKMA must conduct monetary policy consistent with the Currency 
Board Rule, which requires at least 100% backing of the monetary base with US dollars 
(HKMA 2008a). Hong Kong relies on its Exchange Fund to maintain credibility in adh ering 
906
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
to this currency board arrangement. The Exchange Fund is a large portfolio of Hong Kong’s 
foreign reserve assets used to affect the exchange rate of the local currency (BIS 2019). 
8. Program Size: the HKMA announced no limits to the size of lending that  would be 
available under the five temporary liquidity measures.  
The HKMA generally makes discount window lending available on an unlimited basis , and 
the temporary enhancements did not change this. There was also no indication of a limit to 
the availabil ity of credit through the discretionary term lending facility. The HKMA did, 
however, stipulate an HKD 20 million minimum transaction size for term discount window 
repos (HKMA 2008d). 
The liquidity provided through the discount window totaled HK D 8.4 billi on for the six 
months that the enhanced facility and revised Base Rate were effective. Utilization of the 
discount window predominantly occurred in the first month (October 2008) and on the final 
day (March 31, 2009) of the period. Discount window borrowings totaled HKD 5.6 billion in 
October, HKD 2.6 billion on the last day of March, and only HKD 0.1 billion in the almost five 
intervening months (HKMA 2009g; API 2007–2009; HKMA 2009f).  
The Exchange Fund’s Currency Board Sub -Committee also reported the num ber of banks 
using the discount window and the corresponding frequency in two periods, September 20 
through November 20, 2008 (the first period) and November 21, 2008, through March 30, 
2009 (the second period). In the first period, nine banks used the facility once, while two 
borrowed on three occasions (HKMA 2009e); in the second period, which excludes March 
31, only four banks accessed the facility (HKMA 2009f). In both periods, HKMA noted that 
Exchange Fund paper was the sole instrument used as collateral. 
Included in Figure 3 for context are the total discount window borrowings from the prior 
and following six-month periods. 
Figure 3: Changes in the Aggregate Balance Arising from Discount Window Activities 
Half-year period Total lending (HKD million) 
April – September 2007 10,830 
October 2007 – March 2008   8,157 
April – September 2008   5,545 
October 2008 – March 2009   8,358 
April – September 2009         11 
 
Note: The highlighted row represents that period in which the enhanced discount window operated. 
Source: API 2007–2009. 
These data do not differentiate between the traditional overnight and enhanced discount 
window. However, the following evidence suggests that the extended loan terms and 
additional collateral options were never used.  
907
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 14 ---
The daily interbank figures provided by the HKMA show that each discount window liquidity 
injection was quickly reversed within a day throughout the six -month temporary program 
(API 2007–2009). This suggests that despite the provision for longer term borrowings, the 
discount window did not extend liquidity support beyond single-day maturities. The absence 
of long-term lending, in addition to the fact that banks collateralized their discount window 
borrowing exclusively with Exchange Fund paper , suggests that neither the extended term 
nor additional collateral options were used during the temporary operations of the enhanced 
discount window (HKMA 2009f; HKMA 2009e).  
Due to aggregate reporting, we cannot determine the amount of liquidity provided through 
the discretionary term lending facility. However, since the HKMA noted that utilization of 
temporary liquidity measures was “mainly confined to the fourth and fifth measures,” we 
infer that banks borrowed from the discretionary term lending facility, not from the 
extended provisions of the enhanced discount window (HKMA 2009b). 
9. Individual Participation Limits: Participation limits were not explicitly disclosed, 
but revised lender-of-last-resort ( LOLR) guidelines appeared to limit lending 
support to 200% of a bank’s capital. 
When the liquidity facilities were int roduced, the HKMA did not explicitly mention a 
participation limit for individual banks.  
Although not explicitly linked to the liquidity arrangements in 2008, the HKMA’s 1999 policy 
statement on its LOLR framework established precedent for limits to poten tial borrowings 
from the enhanced discount window and discretionary term lending facility. The statement 
set a limit on liquidity support per institution between “100% to 200% of the capital 
base…subject to a cap of HK D 10 billion” and conditional upon mee ting a minimal capital 
adequacy ratio of 6% (HKMA 1999). To lend in excess of 200% of a bank’s capital, the HKMA 
would need approval from the Financial Secretary (Carse 2008). On March 26, 2009 , t he 
HKMA slightly  revised the policy statement on LOLR arrangements, days before the 
expiration of the five temporary liquidity measures, which raised the cap to HK D 25 billion 
per bank (HKMA 2009c) . To additionally limit moral hazard, the HKMA emphasized its 
discretion to lend le ss than the maximum amount for which an institution may qualify 
(HKMA 1999). 
10. Rate Charged: The extended tenors for discount window repos used a fixed rate at 
the Base Rate + 0.25%, while the discretionary term lending referenced market 
rates. 
The enhanced discount window repo operations added a 0.25% fee on top of the Base Rate 
for pricing overnight funding (HKMA 2008d). Before the October 8 revision, the calculation 
for the Base Rate was the US Federal Funds Target Rate (FFTR) plus 1.5%. On October 8, the 
HKMA revised the Base Rate calculation down to the FFTR plus 0.5% (HKMA 2009e).  
The Base Rate plus 0.25% applied equally to all eligible collateral. Consequently, the price at 
which banks borrowed from the discount window against collateral declined further with 
the Base Rate revision introduced October 9, 2008 (HKMA 2008b).  
908
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
The fourth measure, forex swaps, were priced according to market rates (HKMA 2008d). The 
HKMA initially priced the fifth measure, the discretionary term lending facility, according to 
market interest rates; however, it announced on November 6, 2008, that it had discretion to 
charge a below-market rate, since such lending was secured by collateral (HKMA 2008i).  
11. Eligible Collateral: Eligible collateral for repos primarily included Exchange Fund 
paper and US Treasuries. 
The enhanced discount window expanded eligible collateral for discount window credit 
from Exchange Fund paper to include US Treasuries. Exchange Fund paper collateral, like US 
Treasuries, included bills and notes of variou s maturities. In the same announcement, the 
HKMA noted that it would “keep the list of US-dollar assets of credit quality acceptable to the 
discount window under review” and “consider refining it if necessary” (HKMA 2008d). The 
HKMA did not add to the list  of eligible collateral during the term of the enhanced discount 
window’s operations. A schedule for haircuts on the Exchange Fund paper and US Treasury 
collateral is outlined in Figure 4.  
Figure 4: Schedule of Haircuts for the Enhanced Discount Window 
 
Source: HKMA 2008d. 
Like the enhanced discount window, the discretionary term lending facility also accepted 
Exchange Fund paper and US Treasuries for collateral using the same haircut schedule. The 
HKMA also noted in the statement that eligible collateral under the discretionary lending 
facility may include “other assets of acceptable quality to the HKMA” (HKMA 2008d). In the 
1999 LOLR statement, the HKMA specified other eligible collateral for LOLR repo as 
investment-grade securities with minimum ratings listed in Figure 5; such securities did not 
qualify for discount window collateral, which remained confi ned to Exchange Fund paper 
unless otherwise noted (HKMA 1999).  
Figure 5: Investment-Grade Securities Eligible for LOLR Repo as of August 1999 
 
Source: HKMA 1999. 
909
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 16 ---
These investment -grade securities establi shed precedent for the eligible collateral at the 
discretionary term lending facility. At the time of the 1999 statement, “other investment 
grade securities” were separated from those “eligible for rediscount at the Discount 
Window” (HKMA 1999). The “other investment grade securities” were subject to a minimum 
haircut of 10% , but the actual haircut applied would reference “factors including the 
[maturity], the quality of the security and actual terms of the repo arrangement” (HKMA 
1999).  
When the five temporary measures expired, the HKMA formally adopted the forex swap and 
discretionary term lending facilities as standing liquidity instruments (HKMA 2009b). In the 
March 26, 2009, updated LOLR statement, the HKMA retained this minimum hairc ut for 
other investment-grade collateral and used an almost identical table to identify the minimum 
acceptable rating for such discretionary term lending collateral, given in Figure 6 (HKMA 
2009c). 
Figure 6: Investment-Grade Securities Eligible for LOLR Repo as of March 2009 
 
Source: HKMA 2009c. 
12. Loan Duration: The temporary liquidity measures allowed banks to place bids for 
maturities of one month and three months.  
The enhanced discount window permitted banks to request loans with one - and three -
month maturities, in addition to overnight (HKMA 2008d). Similarly, the foreign exchange 
swap facility offered loans with a maximum maturity of three months. The discretionary 
term lending facility initially offered a maximum term of up to one month but was extended 
to three months on November 6, 2008 (HKMA 2008e).  
13. Other Conditions: No other conditions of note were imposed on the lending. 
Other than as discussed elsewhere in this case, we did not identify any other conditions that 
applied to the lending under the enhanced discount window, discretionary term lending, and 
swap facilities. 
14. Impact on Monetary Policy Transmission: The temporary liquidity measures had 
modest impacts on the monetary operations. 
In its initial announcement, the HKMA emphasized that the temporary liquidity measures 
would conform to the currency board arrangement , ensuring full backing of the monetary 
base with US dol lar assets. Since these liquidity measures could temporarily increase the 
910
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
Aggregate Balance, the HKMA noted that it would conduct sterilizing measures, if necessary, 
to offset corresponding expansions in the monetary base (HKMA 2008a). 
When compared to HKMA’s forex operations, t he enhanced discount window and new 
liquidity facilities were significantly smaller in the scale of liquidity injections . From mid-
September to the end of December 2008, the Aggregate Balance increased from around HKD 
4.7 billion to HKD 158 billion; during this period the HKMA sold HKD 182.8 billion in forex 
injections, while the liquidity provided through the temporary measures peaked at a modest 
HKD 11.4 billion (HKMA 2008i).  
In November 2009, the significant increase in the monetary base, through the expansion of 
the Aggregate Balance, required a transfer of US dollar assets from the Investment Portfolio 
to the Backing Portfolio as the backing ratio11 hit its lower trigger at 105% for the first time 
ever (HKMA 2009h). 
15. Other Options: Aside from the other liquidity tools administered in concert with 
the enhanced discount window facility, no other options were detailed.  
The HKMA heavily relied on foreign exchange operatio ns in both passive and active forms, 
detailed in Key Design Decision No. 3, Part of a Package, to aid efforts in providing liquidity 
to the interbank market. 
16. Similar Programs in Other Countries: The nature of HKMA’s temporary liquidity 
measures—encompassing numerous amendments and additions to its existing 
toolset—makes it difficult to compare with programs in other countries. 
The three enhancements to the discount window and introduction of two new liquidity 
facilities (forex swap and d iscretionary term lending) were all deployed together as one 
unique program. The subsequent Base Rate reduction also played in important role to 
facilitate discount window borrowing. Without reducing the entire program down to 
individual measures, it is hard to find cross-country comparisons.  
17. Communication: The HKMA announced the introduction of—and updates to—the 
enhanced discount window, discretionary term lending, and swap facilities 
through press releases. 
The HKMA announced the five temporary measures in a press release on September 30, 
2008, which included a technical annex detailing the mechanics of the new liquidity 
provisions (HKMA 2008c) . The HKMA subsequently issued a press release on October 8, 
announcing the Base Rate reduction effective the following day, lowering the discount 
window borrowing costs (HKMA 2008b) . These two announcements appeared to have 
immediate impacts on short-term interbank interest rates (Fung and Yu 2009).  
 
11 The backing ratio is defined as ratio of Backing Assets (highly  liquid USD securities) to Hong Kong’s 
monetary base (HKMA 2008i; BIS 2019). 
911
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 18 ---
The only apparent c hange to these measures was also detailed in a press release on 
November 6th, 2008. In that press release, the HKMA refined the fifth measure, allowing 
three-month term loans and scope for below-market rates (HKMA 2008e).  
When the program was first introduced, the HKMA explained that although it had provided 
ample liquidity injections through foreign exchange intervention, the temporary measures 
would “further mobilise liquidity in a targeted manner to banks that may find themselves in 
need” (HKMA 2008a) . The HKMA also emphasized that the liquidity measures would be 
temporary in nature, lasting only six months through the end of March 2009 (HKMA 2008c). 
According to the  HKMA, the pre -defined length of the program would help limit moral 
hazard— “so that indi vidual banks would not become overly dependent on the specially 
arranged liquidity facilities and undesirable business behaviour would not be promoted” 
(HKMA 2009a).  
In a December 2008 report that included an assessment of Hong Kong’s crisis response, the  
IMF staff commended financial authorities’ swift announcement of crisis response measures, 
particularly in regard to their “effective communication strategy to reassure investors and 
clearly explain the rationale behind each new policy step” (IMF 2008).  
18. Disclosure: The HKMA disclosed the utilization of the discount window and other 
temporary liquidity measures through anonymized daily and periodic reports.  
The HKMA notifies the public quickly following monetary -policy actions through press 
releases and d aily reports of monetary figures . For that reason, the Bank for International 
Settlements has said that the HKMA operates with a “high degree of transparency”  (BIS 
2019). In this case, the HKMA reported the borrowing activity from the enhanced discount 
window and discretionary term lending facility in aggregate amounts that included other 
credit instruments, making it difficult to determine the size of the temporary operations.  
When the five measures were introduced, the HKMA noted its intention to announce any 
changes in the Aggregate Balance corresponding to the temporary liquidity measures 
through standard publication channels (HKMA 2008c). This included daily publications of 
interbank liquidity on HKMA’s Reuters pages. However, in these releases, HKMA did not 
explicitly distinguish the liquidity provided through the temporary liquidity measures from 
other traditional instruments (HKMA 2008d) . Reports from the Currency Board Sub -
Committee, published twice over the temporary liquidity program’s six -month duration, 
provided additional information on discount window activity. These two reports detailed 
the total number of banks segmented by frequency of discount window visits; the figure s 
anonymized the banks and only presented the aggregate borrowings over the periods 
(HKMA 2009f). 
19. Stigma Strategy: The HKMA made no mention of a strategy to avoid stigma. 
While the HKMA did not mention a stigma strategy in its discussions of the temporary 
liquidity measures, the utilization of the discount window during the duration of the 
enhanced measures may indicate that stigma perception was not a factor in banks’ 
borrowing activity. Unlike the U.S., discount -window lending in Hong Kong occurs more 
912
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
frequently, and the HKMA does not discuss stigma concerns often. The HKMA’s note that 
banks disproportionately used the discretionary term lending and swap facilities rather than 
the enhanced discount window terms may indicate other deciding factors such as collateral 
flexibility or pricing (HKMA 2009b). Nevertheless, the HKMA’s aggregate reporting of loans 
provided through the enhanced discount window and discretionary term lending facility 
makes it difficult to determine the quantity and frequency of borrowi ngs from these 
facilities.  
20. Exit Strategy : The HKMA decided to return to nominal discount window 
operations and to retain the discretionary term lending and swap facilities. 
On March 26, 2009, the HKMA announced that it had decided to allow the enhanced discount 
window lending to expire as previously announced (HKMA 2009b). It reverted to its normal 
function, accepting only Exchange Fund paper as collateral for overnight liquidity “so as to 
safeguard exchange rate stability under the Currency Board system” (HKMA 2009c). As for 
the Base Rate revisions set to expire at the end of March, the HKMA reinstated the HIBOR leg 
of the calculation while making permanent “the narrower 50 -basis point spread over the 
federal funds target rate… compared with the previous s pread of 150 basis points” (HKMA 
2009b).  
The HKMA also announced that it would continue to offer a forex lending and a discretionary 
term lending facility as standing facilities after the temporary measures expired on March 
31, 2009. In announcing the dec ision to permanently incorporate the discretionary term 
lending and forex swap facilities into its liquidity framework, the HKMA noted that the 
“utilisation of the five temporary measures [were] mainly confined to the fourth and fifth 
measures” (HKMA 2009b).  
 
  
913
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 20 ---
References and Key Program Documents 
Documents cited in the text are introduced with a parenthetical author -date citation. 
Documents that are relevant to this case but have not been cited in text do not include this 
parenthetical reference. 
Program Summaries 
(HKMA 2008a) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008a. “Provision of Liquidity 
Assistance to Licensed Banks in Hong Kong: Annex 1.” 
Document from press-release annex summarizing the five temporary liquidity measures 
introducing enhancements to the discount window as well as new discretionary term lending 
and forex swap facilities. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/provision-liquidity-assistance-licensed-banks-hong-
kong-annex-1 
Implementation Documents 
(Financial Secretary 2008) Financial Secretary. 2008. “Financial Secretary Announces New 
Measures to Support Confidence in the Hong Kong Banking System.” 
Press release noting the Financial Secretary’s announcement of the Exchange Fund’s full 
deposit guarantee and the creation of the Contingent Bank Capital Facility. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-secretary-announces-new-measures-support-
confidence-hong-kong-banking-system 
(HKMA 1999) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 1999. “Policy Statement on the Role 
of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority as Lender of Last Resort.” 
Policy statement from 1999 describing HKMA’s role as the LOLR and serving as precedent for 
the temporary liquidity support introduced in 2008. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/policy-statement-role-hong-kong-monetary-authority-
lender-last-resort 
(HKMA 2008b) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008b. “HKMA to Adjust the 
Formula for Determination of the Base Rate: Annex.” 
Annex of press release, days after the introduction of the temporary liquidity measures, 
detailing the changes to the calculation of the Base Rate used to price discount window 
borrowings. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/hkma-adjust-formula-determination-base-rate-annex 
(HKMA 2008c) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008c. “HKMA to Provide 
Liquidity Assistance to Licensed Banks in Hong Kong.” 
Press release announcing the introduction of five temporary liquidity measures to provide 
backstop funding options for banks in the wake of growing stress in the interbank market. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/hkma-provide-liquidity-assistance-licensed-banks-
hong-kong 
914
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
(HKMA 2008d) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008d. “Provision of Liquidity 
Assistance to Licensed Banks in Hong Kong: Annex 2.” 
Technical document from press release annex describing the mechanics and conditions for 
utilizing the five temporary liquidity measures via the enhanced discount window, 
discretionary term, and forex swap facilities. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/provision-liquidity-assistance-licensed-banks-hong-
kong-annex-2 
(HKMA 2008e) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008e. “Refinements to the 
Measures for Providing Liquidity Assistance to Licensed Banks in Hong Kong.” 
Press release announcing slight changes to the fifth temporary liquidity measure 
(discretionary term lending) which extends the maximum borrowing term and provides scope 
for charging below market rates. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/refinements-measures-providing-liquidity-assistance-
licensed-banks-hong-kong 
(HKMA 2008f) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008f. “The Three-Tier Banking 
System.” 
Archived HKMA web page describing Hong Kong’s three-tier banking system. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/three-tier-banking-system-0 
(HKMA 2009a) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009a. “Exit Strategies from 
Temporary Measures.” 
Press release discussing the HKMA’s considerations in the final weeks before the planned, end-
of-March expiration date of the temporary measures. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/exit-strategies-temporary-measures 
(HKMA 2009b) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009b. “HKMA to Continue the 
Provision of Liquidity Assistance to Banks (Lender of Last Resort).” 
Press release noting HKMA’s intention to fully exit from the temporary measures pertaining to 
the discount window while deciding to formally adopt the forex swap and discretionary term 
lending facilities into its ongoing monetary frameworks. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/hkma-continue-provision-liquidity-assistance-banks-
lender-last-resort 
(HKMA 2009c) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009c. “Revised Policy Statement 
on the Role of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority as Lender of Last Resort.” 
Policy statement introducing revisions to the LOLR framework coinciding with HKMA’s exit 
strategy from the temporary liquidity measures. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/revised-policy-statement-role-hong-kong-monetary-
authority-lender-last-resort 
(Legislative Council 2008a) Legislative Council. 2008a. “Two Measures to Safeguard 
Banking Stability.” 
Document detailing the two policies announced by the Financial Secretary to provide a full 
915
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 22 ---
deposit guarantee and introduce the Contingent Bank Capital facility. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/two-measures-safeguard-banking-stability 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(Financial Secretary 2003) Financial Secretary. 2003. “Functions and Responsibilities in 
Monetary and Financial Affairs.” 
Letter from the Financial Secretary to the Monetary Authority detailing the division of 
responsibilities between the two authorities, which clarifies the role of the HKMA. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/functions-and-responsibilities-monetary-and-financial-
affairs 
(Legislative Council 1997) Legislative Council. 1997. “Exchange Fund Ordinance,” 12. 
Statute describing the Exchange Fund and its authorities, including the legal authority of 
HKMA. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/cap-66-exchange-fund-ordinance-0 
Media Stories 
(Bruner 2008) Bruner, Robert F. 2008. “Anatomy of a Run on the Bank.” 
Blog post from Darden School of Business professor describing the recent deposit run on the 
Bank of East Asia in Hong Kong. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/anatomy-run-bank 
Press Releases/Announcements 
(API 2007–2009) HKMA-API (API). 2007–2009. “Daily Figures of Interbank Liquidity – 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority.” Daily Figures of Interbank Liquidity. HKMA Open API. 
Open-source application programming interface (API) from the HKMA providing historical 
data on interbank liquidity statistics, accessed through code. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/daily-figures-interbank-liquidity-hong-kong-monetary-
authority 
(API 2008) HKMA-API (API). 2008. “Hong Kong Interbank Interest Rates – Daily Figures – 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority.” Daily Figures of Interbank Liquidity. HKMA Open API. 
Open-source API from the HKMA providing historical data on interbank interest rates, 
accessed through code. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/hong-kong-interbank-interest-rates-daily-figures-hong-
kong-monetary-authority 
(HKMA 2008g) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008g. “Report on Currency Board 
Operations (6 August 2008 – 19 September 2008): Annex.” 
Report, prepared by the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee’s Currency Board Sub-
Committee, discussing monetary operations in the period before the introduction of the 
temporary liquidity measures; the report also provides additional information on the discount 
window activity. 
916
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/report-currency-board-operations-6-august-2008-19-
september-2008-annex 
(HKMA 2009d) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009d. “Record of Discussion of 
the Meeting of the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee Currency Board Sub-Committee 
Held on 5 December 2008.” 
Press release summarizing the discussions of the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee’s 
Currency Board Sub-Committee, which remarks on the foreign exchange operations and 
temporary liquidity measures undertaken by the HKMA beginning in September 2008. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/record-discussion-meeting-exchange-fund-advisory-
committee-currency-board-sub-committee 
(HKMA 2009e) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009e. “Report on Currency Board 
Operations (20 September 2008 – 20 November 2008): Annex.” 
Report, prepared by the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee’s Currency Board Sub-
Committee, discussing monetary operations in the first period of the temporary liquidity 
measures’ duration The report also provides additional information on the discount window 
activity. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/report-currency-board-operations-20-september-2008-
20-november-2008-annex 
(HKMA 2009f) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009f. “Report on Currency Board 
Operations (21 November 2008 – 30 March 2009): Annex.” 
Report, prepared by the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee’s Currency Board Sub-
Committee, discussing monetary operations in the second coverage period of the temporary 
liquidity measures, ending the day before the programs’ expiration The report also provides 
additional information on the discount window activity. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/report-currency-board-operations-21-november-2008-
30-march-2009-annex 
(HKMA 2009g) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009g. “Report on Currency Board 
Operations (31 March 2009 – 8 July 2009): Annex.” 
Report, prepared by the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee’s Currency Board Sub-
Committee, discussing monetary operations beginning in the last day of the temporary 
liquidity measures’ duration The report also provides additional information on the discount 
window activity. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/report-currency-board-operations-31-march-2009-8-
july-2009-annex 
Reports/Assessments 
(BIS 2019) Bank for International Settlements (BIS). 2019. “Foreign Exchange Market 
Operations and Reserve Management: The Recent Experience of Hong Kong.” 
Report discussing HKMA’s management of the currency board system through foreign 
exchange operations as well as the protocols in place for weathering volatility in capital flows, 
as seen in 2008. 
917
Hong Kong Hoffner

--- Page 24 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/foreign-exchange-market-operations-and-reserve-
management-recent-experience-hong-kong 
(Carse 2008) Carse, David. 2008. “Review of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s Work on 
Banking Stability.” 
Report assessing the HKMA’s policy toolkit for banking stability including the provisions for 
LOLR support. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/review-hong-kong-monetary-authoritys-work-banking-
stability 
(HKMA 2008h) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008h. “Half-Yearly Monetary and 
Financial Stability Report.” 
Report discussing the deterioration in global economic conditions and the emergency 
measures taken by the government and HKMA, including the temporary liquidity support. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/half-yearly-monetary-and-financial-stability-report 
(HKMA 2008i) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2008i. “Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority Annual Report 2008.” 
Annual report from the HKMA covering the initial policy responses, including the temporary 
liquidity programs, to address financial instability. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/hong-kong-monetary-authority-annual-report-2008 
(HKMA 2009h) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009h. “Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority Annual Report 2009.” Hong Kong Monetary Authority. 
Annual report from the HKMA discussing the additional developments in monetary conditions 
during 2009, including the exit from the five temporary liquidity measures. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/hong-kong-monetary-authority-annual-report-2009 
(HKMA 2009i) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009i. “Interdependencies of 
Payment and Settlement Systems: The Hong Kong Experience.” 
Article, prepared by the HKMA’s Financial Infrastructure Department, explaining the 
interdependent payment and settlement systems in Hong Kong as well as the operations of 
bank transactions with the HKMA. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interdependencies-payment-and-settlement-systems-
hong-kong-experience 
(HKMA 2009j) Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). 2009j. “Operation of Monetary 
Policy.” 
Article discussing the operations of the HKMA in the fourth quarter of 2008. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/operation-monetary-policy-march-2009 
(IMF 2008) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2008. “People’s Republic of China—Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region: Staff Report for the 2008 Article IV Consultation.” 
Report documenting the IMF staff’s consultation discussions in which they evaluate the 
efficacy of the government and HKMA’s initial response to the Global Financial Crisis. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/peoples-republic-china-hong-kong-special-
administrative-region-staff-report-2008-article-iv 
918
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
(Legislative Council 2008b) Legislative Council. 2008b. “Panel on Financial Affairs of the 
Legislative Council (November 2008).” 
Document recording the discussions from the Panel on Financial Affairs including a statement 
from Joseph Yam, the chief executive of the HKMA, on the recent liquidity measures 
introduced. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/briefing-work-hkma 
(Yam 2009) Yam, Joseph. 2009. “Report on the Work of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority.” Hong Kong Monetary Authority. 
Report discussing the HKMA’s interventions in context. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/report-work-hong-kong-monetary-authority 
Key Academic Papers 
(Fung and Yu 2009) Fung, Laurence, and Ip-wing Yu. 2009. “Dislocations in FX Swap and 
Money Markets in Hong Kong and Policy Actions during the Financial Crisis of 2008.” 
Working Paper quantifying the effectiveness of the government and the HKMA’s initial policy 
choices to address interbank and FX swap market stress following the failure of Lehman 
Brother. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/dislocations-fx-swap-and-money-markets-hong-kong-
and-policy-actions-during-financial-crisis 
 
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
919
Hong Kong Hoffner