--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Tim Clark Lessons Learned: Tim Clark 
Lynnley Browning 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Browning, Lynnley (2022) "Lessons Learned: Tim Clark," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 
195-197. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1425 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/7 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/7

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Tim Clark 
By Lynnley Browning 
During the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–09, Tim Clark was senior adviser in the Division of 
Banking Supervision and Regulation at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Clark was a chief architect of the Federal Reserve’s capital and liquidity stress tests that helped 
to stabilize the banks . He was also one of the leaders behind the implementation of the Dodd -
Frank Act and other reforms at the Federal Reserve, and ultimately served as deputy director 
of the Division for Supervision and Regulation. This abstract is based on an interview with Clark 
that occurred on December 13, 2019; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
During a crisis, m anaging the market’s belief s and expectation s about government 
action is very  important. Get it wrong , and the private sector will withd raw even 
further, which can make things much worse. 
Before working on the Fed stress test, Clark assisted in the rescue of Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac, the two giant quasi-governmental mortgage entities. The government’s actions putting 
them into conservatorships provided a moment of calm, which unfortunatel y didn’t last —
Lehman Brothers failed shortly thereafter.  
Clark remembers the moment he learned of that event and that some of his peers were very 
concerned that “ the markets and the public would be concerned that there wasn ’t enough 
government support at that point to keep things stable.” Yet, Clark said, it was very important 
to try and maintain the confidence of the markets because the government wanted the 
markets to participate in the recovery . At the time, this was a  very novel idea, but it would 
be a powerful way to demonstrate confidence in the government’s response . “One way to 
restore broader confidence is to show that there are private investors who have enough 
confidence that they’re willing to put billions of dollars at risk,” said Clark. Although the crisis 
was well underway in September 2008, he said: 
Things were very bad, but there was still a lot of wealth existing in the world. Quite a 
bit of capital came from outside this country at various points in the crisis , and a lot 
of the major shareholders and the biggest banks hadn ’t gone bust —they still had 
available money. The question was whether they wanted to throw good money after 
bad if the banks were just going to collapse or get nationalized. 
But to make that ha ppen, explained Clark, the government had to chip away at the 
“confidence deficit.”   
According to Clark, attacking that confidence deficit was  very challenging because of a 
number of factors. One was that known information was very uncertain;  “there was a very 
wide range of estimates of the size of the losses in the system, an extremely broad range,” 
said Clark:  
195

--- Page 4 ---
I don't remember them exactly , but there were some that were like, “It’s a few 
hundred billion,” and there were some that said it could be “as hi gh as two trillion.” 
So, when you have a range of estimated losses by people who are acting with 
massively less than complete information, and that range stretches from not really 
being much of a problem to possibly wiping out the entire capital base of the banking 
system, that puts you in a pretty precarious position, in terms of certainty. 
According to Clark, understanding this quandary was crucial to the government’s strategy to 
stabilize the system: It came down to employing more than one tool, and above all, ensuring 
that its efforts were credible.  
In a crisis, the government may not have all the information it needs , and still it will 
have to craft solutions relying on the incomplete and im perfect information it does 
have. Do not be afraid to try se veral different tools; it may take a combination to get 
the right result. 
Because of the many unknowns that were present, Clark said, the government tried multiple 
tools, hoping that the combination would be effective, which thankfully it was. One of the 
most effective tools that the government implemented was the Supervisory Capital 
Assessment Program (SCAP), or stress test for banks, in whose development Clark was 
deeply involved. He said: 
It was far from a foregone conclusion that it was going to actually inspire confidence, 
because we at the Federal Reserve were very clear that it had to be a real stress test. 
So, quite frankly, we didn’t know what the outcome was going to be. And if we had 
tried to predetermine the outcome with a positive happy ending for the banks, that 
would obviously have massively undermined the credibility. So, we literally, I would 
say, did not know that that was going to work. 
The test did work in part because of the rigor of its terms and partly because of the Treasury’s 
commitment under the Capital Assistance Program (CAP) to provide capital to those banks 
the tests showed to be in need of capital.  
. . . if it had not been for the Treasury and the Capital Assistance Program (CAP), where 
they basically said , “We will provide any capital needs the stress test finds using 
convertible mandatory preferred,” then I also think the stress test’s credibility would 
have been massively undermined, because it would have been much harder to just let 
the chips fall if we didn’t know what they were going to fall into. But at least we knew 
for sure that the worst thing that was going to happen here—and that’s not to say it’s 
a good outcome —was that the government would have to pump a bunch of money 
into the banks. From the supervisory perspective, it was not like we had to go into 
this as we did, appropriately uncertain at the outcome and also un certain of what 
would happen to the banks if we exposed them as being overly weak and the private 
sector didn’t provide capital. 
The crisis was in many ways an event of first impression—there was no way to really predict 
how it would evolve or what would successfully arrest it. In this environment, and given the 
196
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
challenge of limited reliable information, Clark says the government considered and tried a 
lot of remedies—“a lot of different things that could have been done a lot of different ways”—
in hopes of arriving at the right mix of solutions. For example, recalled Clark, the original 
plan for the Troubled Assets Relief Program was to buy the assets off the banks’ balance 
sheets, which didn’t happen. Other responses in the mix included the Public Private 
Investment Program (PIPP), which according to Clark, “was never very big; I think it was $30 
billion at its top peak. But they did set up the PPIP , and then we did the stress test and the 
push for private capital injections.” 
According to Clark, the combination of tools eventually produced results that began to turn 
the situation around:  
There was some reduction in uncertainty that was coming out of the stress test, there 
was some reduction in uncertainty coming out of the CAP program, being the 
government’s standing behind the banks and not nationalizing them. There was some 
reduction in uncertainty just as time was going by. While some things were getting 
worse, not everything was. 
According to Clark, these small reductions in uncertainty combined with “some positive 
activity in the markets and some positive indicators in the economy before the final [stress 
test] results came out,” helped to eat away at the confidence deficit and point to a brighter 
direction.  
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2019-58 
Copyright © Yale University. 
 
197
Lessons Learned: Tim Clark Browning