--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Steven B. Kamin Lessons Learned: Steven B. Kamin 
Yasemin Sim Esmen 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Sim Esmen, Yasemin (2022) "Lessons Learned: Steven B. Kamin," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 
3, 202-204. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1427 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/9 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/9

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Steven B. Kamin 
By Yasemin Sim Esmen 
Steven B. Kamin was the deputy director of the division of international finance at the Federal 
Reserve Board during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and was appointed director in 2011. He 
was responsible for  research, policy analysis, and reporting in the areas of foreign economic 
activity, US external trade and capital flows, and developments in international financial 
markets and institutions. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview conducted with Kamin 
on August 16, 2019; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
We need to be careful about excess savings because they can cause interest rates to 
drop and impact current account balances.  
Former Federal Reserve chair Ben Bernanke coined the term “global savings glut” to draw 
attention to the excess of savings around  the world and how it was pulling down interest 
rates. Kamin studied this phenomenon and how it affects the current account balances of 
countries.  
Some people believe it was a primary factor [behind the GFC]. Basically, it did so by 
creating a lot of savi ngs that were intermediated in our financial system, going into 
mortgages that were not always well advised, and leading to the crash in the financial 
system.” 
Having established effective communication and coordination among central banks 
before there is a crisis is invaluable for ensuring a quick, effective, and forceful 
response.  
The ability to borrow in US dollars became very important internationally during the crisis. 
Although foreign banks had a lot of dollar assets, they did not have much dollar li quidity. 
This made swap lines a necessary lifeline for banks abroad so they could continue to function 
and lend, ensuring that the global financial system continued to function. Kamin explained 
that swap lines could be established thanks to the cooperation among foreign central banks 
and the Federal Reserve, which also had the role of the coordinator of swap lines. 
He described how significant these efforts were: In October 2008, following the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers, major central banks coordinated  to set interest rate levels. This signaled 
to the markets that global authorities were cooperating and were ready to respond forcefully 
to the crisis and, thereby, restored confidence. Furthermore, international cooperation was 
also seen within the Group of 2 0 (G-20) countries, which convened and coordinated their 
support with each other through fiscal policy. Kamin stressed that “i n situations where you 
have global challenges, coordination globally is very important.” 
According to Kamin, coordination among va rious countries should not be limited solely to 
monetary or liquidity policy but  should also be established in regards to supervisory 
202

--- Page 4 ---
regulations. In the case of the Global Financial Crisis, Kamin said, such lines of 
communication were already established before the crisis hit , and that helped make the 
response more efficient. 
I would say that it was the swift lines of communication before the crisis that 
permitted the types of global responses that I was referring to before  . . . . There is 
also a great deal of coordination that goes on amongst supervisory authorities to have 
globally coordinated regulations, as can be seen with the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision. However, that, too, was already in process beforehand. 
Our focus should be not only on crisis response but also on of monitoring 
vulnerabilities in the financial system to prevent the eruption of new crises. 
While it is important and useful to learn how to respond better to a crisis, Kamin also 
stressed that i f we want to prevent future financial crises, we should focus on crisis 
prevention as well, and in particular, monitor developments in the financial system . Kamin 
discussed a paper he had written on how the US housing slump turned into a global crisis. 1 
The paper found little evidence of “direct contagion” from the United States to the rest of the 
world, but instead noted that the impact of “indirect contagion” across a number of channels 
had been powerful. He pointed out: 
Accordingly, channels of “indirect contagion” may have played a more important role 
in the global spread of the crisis: a generalized run on global financial institutions, 
given the opacity of their balance sheets; excessive dependence on short -term 
funding; vicious cycles of mark -to-market losses driving fir e sales of MBS; the 
realization that financial firms around the world were pursuing similar (flawed) 
business models; and global swings in risk aversion. The US subprime crisis, rather 
than being a fundamental driver of the global crisis, may have been mer ely a trigger 
for a global bank run and for disillusionment with a risky business model that already 
had spread around the world. 
Following on this, Kamin emphasized that regulators should monitor vulnerabilities in the 
financial system as the Federal Reserve now does with its biannual Financial Stability Report. 
This process could identify potentially troublesome developments, such as an explosion in 
new financial products or a preponderance of troublesome business models.  With such 
knowledge, regulators could understand the risks involved and take early action to reduce 
the opacity around such products and business models, possibly moderating the chances of 
them becoming triggers for a new crisis.  
  
 
1 Steven B. Kamin and Laurie Pounder DeMarco. 2010. “How did a Domestic Housing Slump Turn into a Global 
Financial Crisis?” FRB International Finance Discussions Paper No. 994. April 7, 2010. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1585195.  
203
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2019-22 
Copyright © Yale University. 
204
Lessons Learned: Steven B. Kamin Sim Esmen