--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z:Overview The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z:Overview 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale School of Management 
Greg Feldberg 
Yale School of Management 
Alexander Nye 
Yale School of Management School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale University School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Wiggins, Rosalind Z.; Feldberg, Greg; Nye, Alexander; and Metrick, Andrew (2022) "The Rescue of the US 
Auto Industry, Module Z:Overview," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 300-367. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1265 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/9 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/9

--- Page 3 ---
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, 
Module Z: Overview 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins,1 Greg Feldberg2, Alexander Nye,3 and Andrew Metrick4 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study  
April 8, 2022 
Abstract 
In the fall of 2008 , credit markets tightened a mid a  broader economic downturn  that 
severely impact ed the US auto industry , especially the three largest domestic 
manufacturers, General Motors (GM), Ford Motors, and Chrysler. The companies requested 
assistance from the government  in a bid to stay afloat,  but Congress declined to authorize 
funding. The Bush administration , however, provided bridge  loans to GM and Chrysler 
under the Auto Industry Finance Program (AIFP), funded through the Troubled Asset s 
Relief Program (TARP), to sustain the m until the Obama administration was in place.  
Within months, the Obama administration decided that a speedy bankruptcy would be the 
appropriate way to restructure the companies into viable organizations. Treasury provided 
financing via TARP as Chrysler, then GM, went through an expedited bankruptcy process. In 
support of the restructurings, Treasury also provided assistance to GMAC, Chrysler 
Financial, and to certain auto suppliers, in addition to supporting  consumer warranties, 
bringing total government support for the industry to  approximately $80 billion. Although 
the government lost money on the AIFP, the rescue was relatively popular politically and 
both companies returned to profitability in 2011. This case discusses the various aspects of 
the government’s assistance to the auto industry that began in December 2008 and wound 
down in December 2013. 
Keywords: auto industry, bankruptcy, Chrysler, General Motors, restructuring, TARP  
 
1 Director, the Global Financial Crisis Project, and Senior Editor, YPFS, Yale School of Management. The 
authors thank Kaleb Nygaard and Carey Mott for their excellent research assistance.  
2 Research Scholar and Director of Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
3 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
4 Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management, and Director, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
300

--- Page 4 ---
Introductory note: In analyzing the facilities that were components of this rescue effort a 
color-coded system is used to highlight particularly noteworthy design features. Our color-
coding system is as follows: 
Treatment Meaning 
BLUE: INTERESTING A design feature that is interesting and that 
policymakers may want to consider. Typically, 
this determination is based on the 
observation that the design feature involves a 
unique and potentially promising way of 
addressing a challenge common to this type  of 
program that may not be obvious. Less 
commonly, there will be empirical evidence or 
a widely held consensus that the design 
feature was effective in this context, in which 
case we will describe that evidence or 
consensus.  
YELLOW: CAUTION INDICATED A design feature that policymakers should 
exercise caution in considering. Typically, this 
determination is based on the observation 
that the designers of the feature later made 
significant changes to the feature with the 
intention of improving the functio ning of the 
program. Less commonly, there will be 
empirical evidence or a widely held consensus 
that the design feature was ineffective in this 
context, in which case we will describe that 
evidence or consensus.  
FOOTNOTE IN ITALICS Where the reason that a given design feature 
has been highlighted is not apparent from the 
text, it is accompanied by  an italicized  
footnote that explains why we chose to 
highlight it as we did. Where necessary, 
footnotes will be  used to identify any cavea ts 
or additional considerations that should be 
kept in mind when thinking about the feature.  
This highlighting is not intended to be dispositive. The fact that a design feature is not 
highlighted or is highlighted yellow does not mean that it should not be considered or that 
it will never be effective under any circumstances. Similarly, the fact that a design feature is 
not highlighted or is highlighted blue does not mean that it should always be considered or 
will be effective under all circumstances. The highlighting is our subjective attempt to guide 
readers toward certain design features that (1) may not be obvious but are worth 
301
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
considering or (2) require caution in considering.  Readers must always consider these 
features while keeping in mind the cont ents of the survey as a whole and their own 
particular context and objectives.  
Introduction  
The Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) has written eight case studies that examine 
in detail the various elements of the US government’s assistance to  two auto 
manufacturers, General Motors (GM) and Chrysler Holdings (Chrysler) , and tangentially to 
auto finance companies, suppliers, and customers during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), 
beginning in 2008.  
The government rescue of GM and Chrysler during the GFC presents an unusual case study 
for crisis fighters. In modern capitalist economies, the practice of government intervention 
in financial institutions is well established.  While the details of such interventions remain 
hotly debated, it is clear that government’s statutory roles as deposit insurer and lender of 
last resort provide a justification to actively intervene in this context. 
Industrial companies are different. With few exceptions, capitalist democracies take a 
hands-off appr oach to nonfinancial corporate failure, restricting their role to contract 
enforcement and the administration of the bankruptcy process.  In this way, the rescues of 
GM and Chrysler represented a consequential shift in crisis policy.  In taking this action, it is 
clear that  the US government was motivated by a mix of economic and political 
considerations that had  no clear precedent, and the action raises (unanswered) questions 
about the general theory of such interventions .5 Under what circumstances would a future 
intervention in a nonfinancial company be considered? 
Furthermore, once the government chose to intervene, it exercised a level of control over 
the companies that was far greater than for past or contemporaneous open -bank 
interventions or other assistance to financial institutions . For a long period of time, 
policymakers held effective operational control (or at least veto power) over many 
corporate actions.  For a country without any recent experience of government co ntrol of 
enterprise, this was also a significant precedent. 
 
5 Generally, government assistance to nonfinancial industries has been limited to airlines and other “critical 
industries,” such as railroads. However, during crises, a few governments have also acted to support other 
nonfinancial industries whose failure might pose a systemic risk to the economy. For example, during the 
GFC, France, Russia, and Sweden also assisted their auto industries. (For a discussion of aid to critical 
industries, see Wiggins and Unnava 2020). Additionally, it is worth noting that in 1979, during a recessi on, 
the US government assisted Chrysler with $1.5 billion in government guaranteed loans while requiring of it 
$2 billion in cost -cutting concessions. Chrysler was also required to submit a business plan and granted the 
government warrants for Chrysler stock which ultimately netted it a $500 million profit (NPR 2008). 
 
302
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 6 ---
These two major strategic decisions —to intervene in a nonfinancial company and to do so 
by exercising significant operational control —are worthy of detailed study.  The debate on  
these questions ha s inspired work from an interdisciplinary list of scholars, with no clear 
consensus yet.6 That is not our subject here.  
In this overview case and the other related cases, we review the government’s actions in 
the GM and Chrysler rescue and analyze how th e rescue was conceived and executed in 
order to better understand how nonbank institutions in distress may be supported. In so 
doing, we take th e government’s activist intervention strategy as given and accept that it 
has already decided to intervene and t o take significant operational control.  Thus, in this 
case and the other related cases, we focus on the tactical decisions made to implement 
the government’s strategy. That is, we view the GM and Chrysler case study as an 
opportunity to examine the key des ign decisions required by the underlying strategy of 
activist intervention, since similar implementation decisions could also show up in more 
traditional contexts. 
While this overview case may be read on its own, it is best read in connection with the 
other YPFS cases on the auto industry rescue, which provide additional detail with respect 
to each intervention utilized.  The other YPFS case s, published in 2022 and  considering the 
various elements of the government’s rescue of the US auto industry, are: 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module A: Automotive Bridge Loans” by 
Alexander Nye.  
•  “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module B: Restructuring General Moto rs 
Through Bankruptcy” by Kaleb B. Nygaard. 
•  “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module C: Restructuring Chrysler 
Through Bankruptcy” by Alexander Nye. 
•  “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module D: Emergency Assistance to Ally 
Financial (formerly GMAC)” by Riki Matsumoto and Kaleb B. Nygaard. 
•  “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module E: Emergency Assistance for 
Chrysler Financial” by Alexander Nye. 
•  “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module F: Auto Supplier Support 
 
6 See, for example, Goolsbee and Kruger (2015), “The rescue of the U.S. automobile industry . . . was a 
consequential, controversial, and difficult decision”; Klier and Rubenstein (2012), “th e ensuing restructuring 
of the Detroit Three has substantially changed the industry in the U.S.”); Lubben (2009), “these cases, and 
particularly their structure —a quick lender -controlled §363 sale —are entirely within the mainstream of 
Chapter 11 practice f or the last decade”; and Roe and Skeel (2009), “We conclude that the Chrysler 
bankruptcy cannot be understood as complying with good bankruptcy practice.”  
 
303
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
Program” by Riki Matsumoto. 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G: The Auto Warranty Commitment 
Program” by Benjamin Henken. 
The cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at:  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1. 
In the first part of this overview case, we review the market factors and particular 
circumstances that led to GM and Chrysler’s weakened conditions. We next consider the 
assistance provided to the two manufacturers by the government beginning in December 
2008, and tangential support to the auto finance companies, suppliers, and customers . 
Next, we discuss the key decisions made by the government and highlight unique issues 
presented by GM, Chrysler, and by the highly integrated nature of the automotive industry. 
Lastly, we discuss conclusions that may be of assistance in future efforts.  
I. Background  
The Troubles of the Auto Manufacturers 
The fall of 2008 marked a period of severe eco nomic distress for financial institutions 
around the world . The 10-year US housing bubble burst , and its effects began to 
reverberate throughout the financial system. These effects included a widespread decline 
in housing prices, an increase in delinquenci es and foreclosures, and a considerable 
decrease in the value of residential mortgage -backed securities (RMBS), collateralized debt 
obligations (CDOs), and other related instruments (FCIC 2010, 301). As a result, beginning 
in fall 2007, credit markets began to tighten. Within a year, many such markets , including 
the securitization market, which played an important role in auto financing,  practically 
froze as banks and financial institutions attempted to protect themselves from a developing 
unprecedented downturn in the broader economy (FCIC 2010, 301). 
The US auto industry has long been a major component of the country’s economy and is a 
dominant employer in certain regions.  Formed in 1908, General Motors was the largest US 
manufacturer through m ost of the century ( History.com 2020b; Engelhardt 2009; GAO 
2009b, 5).  In 1953, then–GM p resident Charlie Wilson famously said that  “for years I 
thought what was good for the country was good for General Motors and vice versa. ” This 
statement would soon be transmuted into the popular slogan:  “What’s good for General 
Motors is good for the country ” (Engelhardt 2009). Ford Motor Company (Ford) , which 
pioneered the assembly line process , was incorporated in 1903 ; and Chrysler Holdings 
(Chrysler) was first formed as a company in 1925 ( History.com 2020a; Iacocca 2014). For 
decades, GM, Chrysler , and Ford were the largest US auto manufacturers and came to be 
called the “Big Three .” They would later be called the “Det roit Three” as other 
manufacturers, notably foreign transplant manufacturers such as Honda Motor Co., Toyota 
Motor Corp , and the Volkswagen AG, established factories outside of the industry’s 
traditional midwestern center.  
304
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 8 ---
US auto manufacturers maintained their prominence during most of the century. Periods of 
stagnation were balanced by decades of growth. By 2008, the Detroit Three sat atop a vast 
interdependent web that include d financial companies and thousands of parts suppliers 
and dealers. As of the end of 2007, the Detroit Three employed 239,341 workers in the US 
while the foreign transplants employed roughly 113,000 people , mostly based in the non -
union south (McAlinden, Dzicek, and Menk  2008, 2). In total, “the motor vehicle and parts 
industries employed 732,800  workers directly as of September 2008” (McAlinden, Dzicek, 
and Menk  2008, 2 ). Tens of thousands of auto dealers accounted  for many more jobs  
throughout the country (Statista 2022). 
However, the industry had undergone significant changes and challenges over the decades. 
It had to wrestle with competition from the foreign transplant manufacturers, who focused 
on fuel-efficient passenger cars, and the impact of rising oil and gas prices (Goolsbee and 
Krueger 201 5, 5 -6). By 2008, the Detroit Three were plagued by “the widespread 
perception of perennial quality and reliability issues, lower resale values, poorly received 
new models, and a lack of low -gas-mileage cars at times of rising fuel costs” (Goolsbee and 
Krueger 2015, 5). They were also burdened with high wages and significant legacy costs for 
health care and pensions . (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 6–7; Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 
36–37). In 2008, they were “directly and indirectly responsible for funding the health care 
of 2 million employees, retirees, and dependents of their own companies and their 
suppliers” (McAlinden, Dzicek, and Menk  2008, 6). They were also responsible for the 
pensions of 600,00 0 retirees, obligations which were underfunded by $29 billion (GAO 
2009b, 7).  
The weaknesses of the Detroit Three were particularly striking in comparison to 
operations of the foreign transplant companies, which industry analysts and critics argued 
were more competitive than the Detroit Three in many ways . The transplants paid lower 
wages, faced no legacy costs, and produced vehicles that were not only more reliable and 
popular but also achieved greater resale prices (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 5–7). 
The tightening credit markets of 2008 negatively impact ed the Detroit Three 
manufacturers in several ways , including slower sales, lower profits, and increased cost of 
funding. All had come to rely on increasing amounts of debt and felt the effects of increased 
costs. However, Ford was more prepared than GM or Chrysler  when the crisis hit . In 
September 2006 , it had hired a new CEO, the first from outside the company, and in 
December, Ford had secured a $23.5 billi on line of credit by pledging virtually all of its 
assets as collateral (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 37). T hus, Ford had significant liquidity to 
rely on as the other companies scrambled to raise funds. 
Chrysler and GM  reported 2008 losses of $8 billion and $ 31 billion, respectively (GAO 
2009b, 5). They had to resort to significant borrowings to meet ongoing cash needs. In their 
2008 audit report  of the company , GM’s auditors “ raised ‘substantial doubt ’ about GM’s 
ability to continue as a going concern due to ‘recurring losses  from operations, 
stockholders’ deficit, and inability to generate sufficient cash flow to meet its obligations ’” 
(GAO 2009 b, 5–6). Chrysler struggled with similar circumstances. In a proposed 
restructuring plan submitted to Congress, the manufacturer stated that additional federal 
305
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
funds would be needed to prevent the company from having to file for bankruptcy (GAO 
2009b, 6).  
Beginning in December 2008, t he federal government extended credit to the two 
automakers to avoid their bankruptcy. It phrased its purpose like this:  
The objective of this program is to prevent a significant disruption of the American 
automotive industry that poses a systemic risk to financial market stability and will 
have a negative effect on the real economy of the United States (Treasury n.d.c). 
Funding was conditioned on the manufacturers  presenting credible viability plans 
describing their path s to l ong-term stability. As discussed in the “Program Description”  
section, the government provide d various types of funding to the two manufacturers , 
however, due to the integrated nature of the auto industry , it also provide d support to 
tangential industry sectors and customers. 
Industry Structure and Related Issues 
The US auto industry is  a highly integrated industry of manufacturers, dealers, parts 
suppliers, and finance companies . (Figure 1 illustrates the financial interde pendence 
among these relationships .) Operations of one manufacturer can impact those of another 
through shared suppliers. Th ese factors, as the government was to learn, presented issues 
that would have to be addressed if government funds flowing to the manufacturers were to 
have their intended benefits. 
Figure 1: Key Financial Relationships in the Auto Industry 
 
Source: GAO 2009b, 9. 
306
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 10 ---
Auto Financing 
Because vehicles are significant high -cost purchases, the overwhelming majority of retail 
purchases in the United States—80–90 percent—are financed through loans, many directly 
from a manufacturer’s financing arm (COP 2009b, 7; Bloom 2009a, 25). Dealers also rely on 
“floor plan financing” to purchase almost all their inventory from the manufacturers, and 
these receivables are traditionally securitized as asset-backed securities (ABS) (COP 2009b, 
7). The tightening credit conditions of 2008 caused increases in dealer and customer 
financing costs, and the rising costs exacerbated already plummeting sales , with sales for 
the Detroit Three declining about 25% between January and October 2008 ( COP 2009b, 7; 
BEA n.d.). In addition, new auto loans are often funded through securitization of loans as 
ABS, but in the fall of 2008, the ABS  securitization markets were largely frozen, drastically 
reducing the supply of credit to consumers and businesses (GAO 2009b, 32). 
The government came to realize that government assistance to sustain GM and Chrysler 
would be futile if the cars could not g et to the dealers and consumers. Given the need for 
financing of both dealer inventory and consumer sales, GM and Chrysler each stated in 
their original viability plans that the health of their financing partners, G MAC LLC (GMAC) 
and Chrysler Financial, respectively, were critical to their successful restructuring (GAO 
2009b, 32–33). Given these facts, the US Treasury Auto Team would come to determine 
that if they “were going to prevent a collapse of the auto industry in the short  run, and 
support a recovery in the long run, it would require stabilizing the auto finance industry.” 
(Deese, Shafran, and Jester 2020, 368).  
GMAC. The primary source of financing for GM’s dealers and consumers was the automobile 
finance unit of GMAC, wh ich would change its name to Ally Financial  in 2010 7 (Ally 
Financial 2010 a). GMAC had begun as a captive subsidiary , but GM spun off the unit in 
2006. A controlling interest was acquired by the private-equity firm Cerberus Capital  
Management, which would later purchase Chrysler Financial and Chrysler.8 GMAC also had 
a large mortgage subsidiary, Residential Capital, LLC, commonly known as ResCap, which it 
had acquired in 1990. 9 ResCap was a significant originator of subprime mortgages and one 
 
7 GMAC LLC was renamed Ally Financial in 2010. See Ally Financial 2020. However, GMAC/Ally will be 
referred to as GMAC throughout this case for the purpose of consistency.  
8 By 2008, Chrysler Financial and GMAC, once the captive financing arms of Chrysler and GM, were owned by 
Cerberus Capital Management, a private investment firm. Cerberus owned 100 percent of Chrysler Financial 
and 51 percent of GMAC (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 49, fn1). 
9 In a press release of December 24, 2008, the company described itself as follows, “GMAC Financial Services 
is a global finance company operating in and servicing North America, South America, Europe and Asia -
Pacific. GMAC specializes in automotive finance, real estate finance, insurance, commercial finance, and online 
banking. As of Dec. 31, 2007, the organization had $248 billion in assets and serviced 15 million customers” 
(GMAC LLC 2008e). ResCap eventually filed for bankruptcy in 2012 ( de la Merced 2012). 
307
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
of the largest mortgage securitizers and servicers in the country. It would be hard hit by the 
subprime crisis that developed in 2007 with upstream impacts to GMAC.10  
In 2008, GM retained a significant ownership interest in GMAC, and aspects of the captive 
relationship remained. Subject to certain limitations, GM was required to offer GMAC 
services exclusively if it offered vehicle financing and leasing incentives to customers ( Ally 
Financial 2011, 2). As a result, GMAC facilitated more than 30% of GM’s retail sales ( GMAC 
2009, 12). It also provided more than 80% of the floor plan financing used by the GM dealer 
network to buy new vehicle inventory ( GMAC 2009, 46). As further dis cussed at “Program 
Description: Assistance to Related Segments of the Auto Industry , Assistance to Auto 
Finance Companies , GMAC/Ally Financial ,” to restore liquidity to GMAC’s auto finance 
business, the government intervened with assistance in a variety of  forms, including 
liquidity and capital assistance, originating from a number of agencies. (Also see 
Matsumoto and Nygaard 2022 for further detailed discussion of assistance to GMAC.) 
Chrysler Financial. In early April 2009, Treasury realized that Chrysler’s bankruptcy filing 
would cause Chrysler Financial’s bankers to withdraw its remaining credit lines . Cerberus, 
which owned significant interests in both GMAC and Chrysler Financial, proposed merging 
the two auto finance companies. Instead, GMAC’s CEO suggested winding down Chrysler 
Financial and let ting GMAC finance Chrysler vehicles going forward. Treasury agreed. 
Chrysler Financial would go into “runoff mode,” continuing to hold the loans that it had 
made but not making new ones . It thus would coordinate a new financing relationship 
between Chrysler and GMAC , with GMAC taking over the role as primary financer for 
Chrysler from Chrysler Financ ial (Rattner 2011 , 147 ; see also Nye 2022b and further 
discussion at “Program Description: Assistance to Related Segments of the Auto Industry , 
Assistance to Auto Finance Companies and Chrysler Financial.” 
Auto Parts Suppliers 
The US auto  parts supply  industry is broad and highly integrated  across manufacturers , 
which creates a significant risk of contagion . For example, the Motor and Equipment 
Manufacturers Association (MEMA) released data in 2009 showing that 66 percent of 
Chrysler suppliers were also suppliers to GM , and 54 percent were suppliers to Ford 
Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 11). The same network also supplied parts to the Japanese  
transplants,11 which did not seek government assistance (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 11).  
In autumn 2008, US auto parts suppliers were also experiencing deteriorated automotive 
markets, disrupted manufa cturer operations, and stressed credit markets; several major 
 
10 At the end of 2007, GMAC had $248 billion in assets, including $82 billion in ResCap. The mortgage bust in 
2007 hit ResCap hard; over 2007 and 2008, the company posted $10 billion in losses. GMAC’s auto finance 
unit, profitable in 2007, lost $2.1 billion in 2008 (GMAC LLC 2009, 27). 
11 We use the term “Japanese transplants” in this paper to refer to the Japanese auto manufacturers producing 
vehicles in the US largely outside of the Midwest. In 2008, this included Nissan Motor Company, T oyota Motor 
Corporation, and American Honda Motor Company and their related brands.  
308
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 12 ---
suppliers were on the verge of collapse (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 11). A failure of GM or 
Chrysler would have negatively impact ed the network of suppliers  and caused knock-on 
effects to the broader auto industry. Given these factors, to support the rehabilitation of GM 
and Chrysler, the government would decide to provide assistance to certain auto suppliers.  
See discussion at “Program Description : Assistance to Related Segments of the Auto 
Industry, Auto Parts Suppliers” and Matsumoto 2022 for further details.  
Customer Warranties 
A third related area where the government ultimately provided support was 
manufacturer’s warranties. The manufacturers felt strongly that customers were much less 
likely to purchase a vehicle from  a company in financial distress  because of the risk that it 
might not be around to stand by its warranties , which were for multiple years (Goolsbee 
and Krueger 2015, 21) . When requesting funding, the CEOs of the Detroit Three said that 
this meant that any effort to reorganize through bankruptcy would likely fail and quickly 
become a liquidation as customers deserted the company (Canis et al. 2009, 52).  
A survey by CNW Mark eting Research  “reportedly indicated that 80% of consumers said 
that concerns about warranty coverage and  replacement parts would make them unlikely 
to buy a car from a company operating in  bankruptcy reorganization ” (Canis et al. 2009, 
52). Two later surv eys, including another by CNW , however, indicated that this consumer 
reluctance to purchase vehicles from a bankrupt institution could be reduced or 
neutralized if the government were backing the  reorganization (Canis et al. 2009, 52 ). 
Because of these dynamics, to encourage consumer purchases of GM and Chrysler vehicles 
while the companies were restructuring, the government agreed to provide protection of 
customer warranties (Treasury 2009c; Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 21 ). See discussion at 
“Program Description: Assistance to Related Segments of the Auto Industry , Auto Warranty 
Commitment Program” and Henken 2022. 
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 and the Troubled Assets Relief Program  
On October 3, 2008, Congress pa ssed the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 
(EESA), which created the $700 billion Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) ; $350 
billion of the funds were released immediately 12 (Canis et al. 2009, 9 , 42 ). Under TARP, 
Treasury was granted authority to purchase or guarantee up to $700 billion in “troubled 
assets” from “financial institutions” through its Office of Financial Stability  (EESA, 1). At the 
time, there was uncertainty whether assistance to the auto manu facturers fell within the 
scope of the law13 (COP 2009b, 115). 
 
12 Pub. L. No. 110-343, 122 Stat. 3765 (2008), 12 U.S.C.§ 5201.  
13 A September 2009 Congressional Oversight Committee (COP) report found that “there is a strong 
suggestion in the Congressional Record that many in Congress also believed that EESA was a statute aimed 
specifically at the financial sector” (COP 2009b, 115). The Committee’s report urged Treasury to seek a legal 
 
309
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
Nevertheless, on October 13, shortly after the law passed, the CEO of GM, the largest of the 
Detroit Three, first requested emergency funding from Treasury Secretary Henry M. 
Paulson, Jr., because the company was having trouble financing basic day-to-day operations 
(Deese, Shafran, and Jester 2020 , 363; Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 36 –37; Goolsbee and 
Krueger 2015, 7). Chrysler was experiencing similar difficulties and soon requested 
assistance as well, as did Ford, the second-largest auto manufacturer (Klier and Rubenstein 
2012, 36–37). Although Ford appeared before Congress at the November 2008 h earing, it 
ultimately did not receive targeted assistance from the Treasury.14  
The Bush administration’s initial response to the auto manufacturers’ request for 
assistance was “no ,” since at first President George W. Bush and Secretary Paulson did not 
believe that Congress had authorized TARP funds to be used for an auto bailout ( COP 
2009b 71–73; Rogers 2008).  
The Detroit Three CEOs then reached out via their significant political contacts 15 and in 
November appeared before “the House and the Senate to request a $25 billion working 
capital ‘bridge loan’ from the US government  . . .  to help keep them out of bankruptcy and 
avoid possible liquidation ”16 (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 5) . On November 17, Senator 
 
opinion regarding the use of TARP for the auto rescue , which it did, receiving an opinion from the 
department’s general counsel’s office that supported Treasury’s actions (COP 2009b, 115; McNeill 2022, 2). 
As of March 27, 2009, Treasury had publicly announced funding programs under TARP totaling $667.4 
billion, most of which was used to purchase or guarantee troubled assets from financial institutions, and 
about $422.4 billion had been apportioned (GAO 2010, 1, fn1).  
14 At one point, Ford requested from Congress a $9 billion credit line to provide a backstop i n case the 
economy worsened. As far as we have been able to determine, it was not granted (Kiely 2011). Ford did, 
however, avail itself of several broad -based programs established by the government  during this time, such 
as the Federal Reserve’s Commercial  Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) and Term Asset -Backed Securities Loan 
Facility (TALF). It also participated in the Department of Energy’s Advanced Technology Vehicle 
Manufacturing (ATVM) Loan Program in support of fuel -efficient vehicles during 2009 and 2010 (Adrian and 
Schaumburg 2012; Canis and Yacobucci 2015; BdofGov 2009). Also, because of the interdependence of the 
parts supply chain on which it also relied, Ford was publicly supportive of the government providing 
assistance to GM and Chrysler because i t feared that their failure would cause a chain reaction that would 
negatively impact its own production (Goolsbee and Kruger 2015, 11).  
15 Because of its size and significance, the auto industry has long had a well -funded and influential lobbying 
voice. In 2009, the industry spent $60.2 million on lobbying efforts, a reduction from 2008, during which it 
spent $66.9 million, and there were “ 576 auto industry lobbyists working for 124 clients, such as carmakers, 
auto suppliers, lobbying groups and trade associations.” (Ransom 2010).  
16 Ford joined GM and Chrysler in testifying before Congress, however, it ultimately did not pursue targeted 
assistance from the Treasury (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 36). Although it was also struggling under the 
effects of the burgeoning crisis, the company had taken several steps that helped it prepare for the difficulties 
it faced. In September, the company hired a new CEO and in December arranged a credit line of $23.5 billion. 
As a result, the company did not accept support fr om the Treasury, although it was eligible to request the 
same if it wished (COP 2009b, 35; Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 35).   
310
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 14 ---
Harry Reid introduced a bill 17 that would have provided up to $25 billion to fund bridge 
loans to the auto companies using some of the money authorized for TARP, but the bill 
failed to progress beyond some introductory remarks in the Senate ( UCE Act 2008; Canis et 
al. 2009, 42). 
On Dec ember 10, the House passed a more detailed bill, H.R. 7321, the “Auto Industry 
Financing and Restructuring Act ” (AIFRA 2008).18 The AIFR A would have financed a $14 
billion bailout by reallocating funds appropriated to a Department of Energy (DoE) loan 
program under the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 .19 However, the AIFRA 
bill failed to pass in the Senate (Canis et al. 2009, 8–9).  
Then, Senate Banking Committee Chair Christopher Dodd sent a request to Federal Reserve 
Board Chairman Ben Bernanke asking , among other things, for him to  provide the 
Committee with thoughts and comments on the plans submitted by the companies, 
evaluate GM’s statement regarding the potential broad economic ramifications that might 
attend its  collapse, and “inform the Committee whether there is anything in your statute 
that prevents you from lending to any of these domestic auto -manufacturing companies 
through Section 13(3), or through a special purpose vehicle, which you have used to extend 
funds to other institutions” (Dodd 2008). Bernanke was reported to have all but eliminated 
the possibility of Fed participation in an auto industry bailout due to the companies’ likely 
inadequate collateral and his view that aiding the nonfin ancial companies was best left to 
Congress: “Our view is that questions of industrial policy are best resolved by Congress 
because they require balancing political and social priorities about the shape and 
desirability of involvement by domestic companies in specific industries”20 (Rogers 2008). 
After legislative action to assist the auto companies failed, the Bush administration 
reversed its position. It decided to use TARP funds to keep the companies alive for the 
remainder of the presidential transition period, with hopes of providing an opportunity for 
the Obama administration to review the situation and consider further assistance to put 
them on the  path to restructuring.  This re versed position was possible because of the 
 
17 Unemployment Compensation Extension Act of 2008, S.3688: “A bill to provide for additional emergency 
unemployment compensation, to amend the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 to authorize loans 
to automobile manufacturers and component suppliers, and for other purposes,” 110th Congress.  
18 Auto Industry Financing and Restructuring Act, H.R. 7321, 110th Congr ess (2008). 
19 Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, Public Law 110–140 (2007). 
20 It is worth noting that while tools may be available, if and how those tools are administered and deployed 
may impact the solutions that can be crafted. This can have significant impact when addressing the potential 
failure of a systemically important financial institution. During the GFC, in the US, some such situations 
required ad hoc and multifaceted solutions accomplished by the use of many tools and the coordinatio n 
among several agencies. See for example Wiggins, Lawson, et al. (2021) and Zanger -Tishler and Wiggins 
(2021). For other jurisdictions, the existence of more tools in fewer authorities may facilitate quicker and 
more nimble responses. 
311
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
broad wording written into TARP 21 (Paulson 2010, 416–427; also see Key Design De cision 
No. 3.)  
In December 2008, President Bush authoriz ed Secretary Paulson to exercise his authority 
to use TARP funds to assist the auto industry . However, a t the time, President Bush and 
Secretary Paulson were  publicly circumspect on this use of TARP. President Bush  
addressed the nation , pointing out that , “if we were to allow the free market to take its 
course now, it would almost certainly lead to disorderly bankruptcy and liquidation for the 
automakers,” but that “in the midst of a financial crisis and a recession, allowing the US 
auto industry to collapse is not a responsible course of acti on” (White House 2008).  The 
Federal government would , he said,  “grant loans to auto companies under conditions 
similar to those Congress considered last week [ in H.R. 7321  (AIFRA)]” (White House 
2008). 
In broad terms , TARP authorized the Secretary of the Treasury to purchase “troubled 
assets”22 from “financial institutions.” 23 The statutory definitions are descriptive rather 
 
21 TARP also provided residual discretion to the Secretary of the Treasury to determine what troubled assets 
fit within the statute’s definitions. The situation demonstrates that considering the unknown when crafting 
crisis legislation can be a very useful practice. While crit icized by some government, industry, and academic 
commentators, overall, negative commentary regarding the use of TARP funds for the auto industry appears 
to have been minimal. In some respects, this is consistent with a tradition of affording great defere nce to the 
executive in interpreting statutes (COP 2009b, 76 –78) and much latitude to the government in times of crisis. 
See for example, Friedman (2012) where, although not discussing a financial crisis, he does argue that the 
President’s authority to pro tect the country in a variety of emergencies (terrorist attacks, environmental 
disasters, health emergencies) is broad and that “the Supreme Court has historically supported the 
Executive‘s decisions and independent powers in emergency scenarios” (273). Al so, “According to Justice 
Thomas, “[t]he power to protect the [n]ation ought to exist without limitation because it is impossible to 
foresee or define the extent and variety of national exigencies, or the correspondent extent and variety of the 
means which  may be necessary to satisfy them” (274). Posner (2012) also discusses, in the context of the 
September 11 terrorists’ attacks, the “deference thesis [which] states that during emergencies the legislature 
and judiciary should defer to the executive” (214). A move like this about-face is bound to invite scrutiny from 
oversight bodies, politicians, and public pundits. However, officials can prepare for this by consulting counsel, 
carefully following any applicable procedures supporting the decisions, creating  a credible record of the 
analysis underlying the original and reversed decisions, and preparing to address questions about the change 
in position. 
22 TARP defines “troubled assets” as  “(A) residential or commercial mortgages and any securities, obligations , 
or other instruments that are based on or related to such mortgages, that in each case was originated or 
issued on or before March 14, 2008, the purchase of which the Secretary determines promotes financial 
market stability; and (B) any other financial i nstrument that the Secretary, after consultation with the 
Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, determines the purchase of which is 
necessary to promote financial market stability, but only upon transmittal of such determination , in writing, 
to the appropriate committees of Congress” (12 USC 5202, Section 3[9]). 
23 The relevant TARP definition of ‘‘financial institution’’ is: “any institution, including, but not limited to, any 
bank, savings association, credit union, security bro ker or dealer, or insurance company, established and 
regulated under the laws of the United States or any State, territory, or possession of the United States, the 
District of Columbia, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands,  Guam, 
American Samoa, or the United States Virgin Islands, and having significant operations in the United States, 
 
312
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 16 ---
than restrictive. In particular, although auto manufacturers are not mentioned in the 
definition of financial institutions, such a company arguably is included as an “institution, . . 
. established and regulated under the laws of the United States or any State territory or 
possession” (12 USC 5202 , Section 3[5]). The definition of “troubled assets” encompasses 
certain mortgage and mortgage related securities, but can be expanded by determination of 
the Secretary of the Treasury in accordance with certain procedures set out in the statute  
which include consultation with the Chairman of the Federal Reserve and transmission of 
decision to appropriate committees of Congress named in the statute (12 USC 5202, Section 
3(9)(b)).  
Paulson’s sta tement accompanying the announcement of the au to relief addressed the 
issue in a limited manner:  
Treasury will make these loans using authority provided for the Troubled Asset 
Relief Program. While the purpose of this program and the enabling legislation is to 
stabilize our financial sector, the authority allo ws us to take this action. Absent 
congressional action, no other authorities existed to stave off a disorderly 
bankruptcy of one or more auto companies” (Paulson 2008a).  
In authorizing the use of TARP funds to assist the auto industry, Treasury counsel and 
Secretary Paulson relied on the nexus of the auto manufacturers with their financing 
companies to determine, in accordance with the requirements of TARP, that: 
(1) “such thrift and other holding companies engaged in the manufacturing of 
automotive vehicles an d the provision of credit and financing in connection with 
the manufacturing and purchase of such vehicles are ‘financial institutions,’” and  
(2) that the obligations  of such companies “are financial instruments the purchase of  
which is necessary to promote stability to the financial system  of the United States, 
and, as such are ‘troubled assets ’ as that term is defined in Section 3(9)(B) of the 
Act, and eligible to be purchased under TARP” (Paulson 2008a).  
Once President Barack Obama had been sworn in , his Treasury Secretary, Timothy 
Geithner, issued a “Determination” that was substantially similar to the one Secretary 
Paulson had issued,  except that it referenced the AIFP and seemed to shift away slightly 
from the nexus with the auto financing companies , eliminating any reference to them as a 
basis for the use of TARP funds for the AIFP  (Geithner 2009b). This decision to use TARP 
funds for the AIFP , which was criticized by some, is further discussed in detail in  Key 
Design Decision No. 3. 
 
but excluding any central bank of, or institution owned by, a foreign government” (12 USC 5202, Section 
3[5]). 
313
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
Without government assistance, the likely outcome was that the companies would be 
liquidated in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy process, which everyone thought would be very 
disruptive (Deese, Shafran, and Jester 2020 , 360 –361). In decidi ng to provide funding to 
the manufacturers in December 2008 , the Bush administration, for the time being at least, 
rejected bankruptcy as an available option. Factors influencing this decision were, (1) the 
companies’ lack of preparation for a traditional Chapter 11  reorganization, (2) the 
prolonged nature of such a bankruptcy proceeding,  and (3) the possible unavailability of 
private debtor -in-possession (DIP) financing (Deese, Shafran, and Jester 2020, 36 4; Klier 
and Rubenstein 2012, 7–9, 21). 
Also of importance was the possible impact of such a sudden collapse , as a White House 
spokesperson stated at the time : “A precipitous collapse of this industry would have a 
severe impact on our economy, and it would be irresponsible to further weaken and 
destabilize our economy at this time” (Canis et al. 2009, 9). The White House estimated that 
a failure of GM and Chrysler would in the short -term “result in a more than one -percent 
reduction in real GDP growth and about 1.1 million workers losing their jobs, inclu ding 
workers from auto suppliers and dealers” (White House 2008 ; Paulson 201 0, 424). And 
there was concern that there might be a panic that would risk further destabilization to the 
shared parts supplier network and other manufacturers (Goolsbee and Kruege r 2015, 11; 
Deese, Shafran, and Jester 2020, 361;  COP 2011, 10 -11). The possible sizable costs on 
various levels of government through the need for additional spending on safety net, health 
care, unemployment insurance, and pension rescues as a result of t he companies’ failures  
was also considered  (Deese, Shafran, and Jester 2020 , 363 –364; Goolsbee and Krueger 
2015, 8–91).  
II. Program Description 
Assistance to General Motors 
The Bridge Loan 
On December 19, 2008, President Bush announced that the government would provide up 
to $13.4 billion in TARP -funded secured short-term loans to GM  (the GM Bridge Loan) . A 
portion, $9.4 billion, was to be lent immediately and a second tranche of $4 billion would 
be released in February 2009 if the second tranche of TARP funding  was made available 
and if the company met certain conditions (White House 2008). The government later lent 
GM an additional $6.4 billion under the same loan agreement.  
Funds from the GM Bridge Loan were to be used by GM to become “financially viable ,” 
subject to a number of restructuring and burden -sharing conditions  that were similar to 
terms that had been supported or considered by Congress in its failed efforts to pas s 
targeted funding legislation (White House 2008). The funding was secured by GM’s assets 
(some of which were already encumbered, so the government acquired only a secondary 
lien), carried a  below-market interest rate (the greater of the three-month LIBOR plus 3% 
and 5%), and would expire on March 31, 2009, unless specific terms were met  (Nye 2022b, 
314
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 18 ---
8). The funding, along with loans to Chrysler and other industry parties, would come to be 
known as the Automobile Industry Financing Program (AIFP).24  
Warrants and Additional Notes. Under the law that created TARP, Treasury was mandated 
to receive some type of warrant or other additional security as consideration  for funds 
lent.25 The warrants were designed to have the taxpayers share in the upside of GM ’s 
recovery, which they would fund. There was precedent for such a provision in the 1970s ’ 
rescue of Chrysler; the government realized a profit when it auctioned off its warrants after 
the stock price recovered .26 However, warrants protect taxpayers only i f the business d oes 
not fail, if there is a market for them, or if the stock price exceeds the warrant exercise 
price.  
The warrant and additional security issued pursuant to the GM Bridge Loan were more 
complex than other TARP programs in that the government received both warrants and 
additional security in the form of additional promissory notes (“Additional Notes”) , which 
were a feature in all of the government’s loans to GM and Chrysler.  
In the case of GM, which was publicly traded, Treasury rec eived a warrant to purchase 
common shares equal to 20% of the government’s loan commitment (the $13.4 billion 
“Maximum Loan Amount”). However, the Bridge Loan prohibited Treasury from acquiring 
more than 19.99% of GM’s total common equity prior to the exer cise of the warrants, 
largely to avoid the need to consolidate GM onto the government’s balance sheet 27 
(Treasury 2008; GM and Treasury 2008, 1; White House 2008). If Treasury was prohibited 
 
24 The Bridge Loans for Chrysler and GM were announced before the details of the AIFP, which would become 
the overall support program for assistance to the auto industry, were published. When published, on 
December 31, 2008, the details of the AIFP described the broad parameters that t he government would 
reference in determining assistance to the industry. By then, the first GM loan had already been executed and 
the term sheets for this loan and the Chrysler loan had been available for at least a week. Although preceding 
the published AIFP guidelines, the initial GM and Chrysler loans do appear to largely comply with them.  
25 See EESA 2008, Sec. 113(d). This requirement emerged from various lessons learned from bailouts of the 
late 1970s. Namely, that the government could obtain risk comp ensation for its aid through equity 
participation; for example, receiving warrants. 
26 In its earlier rescue of Chrysler, in the late 1970s, the government, which had guaranteed certain Chrysler 
borrowing and received warrants for 14.4 million shares of com mon stock in connection with its assistance, 
ultimately sold the warrants back to the company for $311 million at auction, resulting in a profit for 
taxpayers (Wilson 2009, 4). In December 2008, in a hearing before the Senate Committee on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs, Senator Tom Carper expressed support for the government’s receiving warrants 
under the Bridge Loan but expressed concern regarding the mechanism because Chrysler was not privately 
traded company: “how do we do warrants with Chrysler in this situation or something akin to warrants so 
that we have a reasonable return for the taxpayers in light of our willingness to take on this risk?” (Senate 
Banking Committee 2008, 86). 
27 Under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), if the gover nment owned 20% or more of a 
company’s stock, it would be considered as controlling and would have to consolidate that company’s assets 
and liabilities onto its balance sheet. The creative structuring of limiting the warrant and compensating the 
treasury w ith an Additional Note avoids this result and allows the government to avoid consolidating GM’s 
huge balance sheet.. 
315
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
from exercising the full amount of the warrants, GM would provide  it an additional 
promissory note (the Additional Note) equal to 6.67% of the Maximum Loan Amount 
minus one-third the value of the common shares Treasury had received on the exercise of 
the warrants (GM and Treasury 2008, PDF p. 2).  
GM also issued additional warrants and Additional Notes to Treasury each time the Bridge 
Loan agreement was amended to increase the Maximum Loan Amount (two successive 
amendments to the GM loans increased the amount by $2 billion and $4.4 billion, 
respectively) (GM and Treasury 2008, PDF p. 300–321). The warrants and Additional Notes 
were effectively the only financial security, beyond the interest payments, that the 
government received in return for extending the term of and the authorized amount loaned 
to GM (GM LSA 2008, PDF pp. 300–321, 329).  
In the end , Treasury did not exercise the warrants.  Following formation of “New GM,” the 
corporation that purchased m ost of GM ’s assets in the Section 363 sale and continued its 
business, the original $13.4 billion bridge loan and the $6 billion working capital loan were 
terminated (discussed in “The Viability Plan and Working Capital Loan ” later in this 
section), including the associated warrants and Additional Notes. In consideration of these 
amounts and the $19.9 billion GM DIP Loan  (discussed in “The Restructuring and Debtor -
in-Possession Financing” later in this section ) the US government received approximately 
60.8% of the equity of New GM , which is a standard treatment of debtholders in a 
bankruptcy action (COP 2011, 30). In this case, it is also consistent with the TARP provision 
that called for additional security in connection with government loans. 
Limits on Executive Compensation . In addition, b ecause the GM Bridge Loan was funded 
from TARP, GM was subject to restrictions regarding the compensation of its top five 
executives28 (Canis et al. 2009, 67–68). Broadly, the company had to ensure that executives 
(1) did not take unnecessary and excessive  risks that threatened the value of the company, 
(2) were subject to provisions that allow ed for the company’s recovery or the claw back of 
any bonus or incentive compensation paid to them that was based on inaccurate financial 
statements, and (3) were not allowed to receive golden parachute payments from the 
company during the time in which the Treasury held an equity stake in the company (Canis 
et al. 2009, 51, 68, 74). 
Other Terms. The GM Bridge Loan was also guaranteed by GM’s subsidiaries and provided 
that any successor to G M had to stand as a guarantor, effectively prohibiting the sale of GM 
away from the obligations (Canis et al. 2009, 53–54).  
 
28 These provisions were contained in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA 2009, 
P.L. 111 -5), which was signed on Februa ry 17, 2009. ARRA’s section on executive privileges and 
compensation for recipients of TARP assistance amended and replaces Section 111(b) of the Emergency 
Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA 2008) and subsequent Treasury Department interpretive 
guidelines (Canis et al. 2009, 68). 
316
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 20 ---
In an effort  to further protect taxpayers, the Bridge Loan also  provided that in the case of 
the company’s bankruptcy, the government would be permitted to convert the Bridge Loan 
to Debtor-in-Possession (DIP) financing (Canis et al. 2009, 54).  
DIP financing provides the debtor -in-possession in a bankruptcy case with sufficient funds 
to meet continuing expenses while the business is either reorganized or liquidated. 
Generally, DIP financing is usually a post-petition obligation that enjoys a n extremely high 
priority. A bankruptcy court can authorize a debtor to grant liens to the DIP lender that are 
senior to liens of all the pre -bankruptcy creditors. In theory, Treasury’s ability to convert 
the bridge loans to DIP loans would enable it to maintain, o r increase, the likelihood of 
repayment from the bankruptcy estate protecting the taxpayers’ investment  (Canis et al . 
2009, 54).  
However, the Congressional Research Service concluded that this conversion provision 
would go against the very purpose of DIP loans, and even the key tenets of the bankruptcy 
process, which require that senior creditors be paid before junior creditors (Canis et al. 
2009, 54) . The converted Bridge/DIP loans would not provide GM or Chrysler with 
additional working capital, they would keep the bankruptcy court from relieving the debtor 
of its pre -bankruptcy debts, and they would negatively impact other credito rs. Ultimately, 
the Bridge Loans were not converted to DIP loans , but Treasury did provide new DIP 
funding to both companies with Export Development Canada , Canada’s export credit 
agency (COP 2009b, 23–31). (See discussion in “The Restructuring and Debtor-in-Possession 
Financing” and “Assistance to Chrysler : The Restructuring and Debtor -in-Possession 
Financing” in this section.) 
The Viability Plan and Working Capital Loan 
GM had originally submitted a restructuring plan when it first appeal ed to Congress  for 
funding. The plan was largely viewed as inadequate but did form the basis for the 
administration’s decision to require the company to submit a “viability plan” by February 
28, 2009 , as a condition for receiving the GM Bridge Loan  (White House 2008 ). The 
viability plan had to include operational changes that demonstrated a path to long -term 
viability. The administration specifically called for s ignificant concessions from creditors 
and labor29 (White House 2008). The plan was to be reviewed by the President’s designee, 
but when President Bush failed to appoint a designee, the job fell to Treasury Secretary 
 
29 Requiring the viability plan was quite consequential. It was noted by the Congressional Oversight Panel 
(COP) that financial companies, some which had received significantly more funding than the auto 
manufacturers would, had not been subjected to such a requirement. The plans provided another way for the 
government to monitor the manufacturers’ use of funds and progress; both the plans and the government’s 
(sometimes unfavorable) evaluation of them were released publicly. A rguably, the public nature of these 
plans assisted in the manufacturers’ required negotiations with various parties (debtholders, suppliers, 
unions, etc.), in which the government also played a role. See discussion at Key Design Decision Nos. 7 and 8.  
317
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 21 ---
Paulson; President Obama would assign this responsibility to an Auto Task Force. 30 If the 
submitted viability plan was found to be unsatisfactory , the Bridge Loan  could be called . 
The loan could also be extended at the government’s discretion (White House 2008). 
The viability plan GM submitted in February was determined to be unsatisfactory . 
Nevertheless, a fter its evaluation, the government concluded that “because of GM ’s scale, 
franchise and progress to date, we believe that there could be a viable business within GM 
if the company and its stakeholders engage in a substantially more aggressive restructuring 
plan” (White House 2009a). Therefore, on March 31, 2009, the government announced that 
it was providing  GM with working capital  (the “working capital loan”) in an unstated 
amount for 60 days to buy it time to develop a more robust plan  (Treasury 2009c). At the 
same time, the administration announced that GM  CEO Rick Waggoner was stepping aside 
and signaled that bankruptcy might be a necessary tool that could be used “in a quick and 
surgical way” to effectuate a restructuring 31 (Treasury 2009c). The amount of working 
capital extended to GM would ultimately total $6 billion ( GM and Treasury  2008, PDF pp. 
301–319).  
In the interim months, Treasury officials assisted GM to varying degrees in negotiating 
concessions with its major creditors and labor unions. In April, GM submitted a revised 
viability plan, which the Treasury characterized as one that “rework[ed] its business plan, 
accelerate[d] its operational restructuring  and ma[de]  far greater  reductions in its 
outstanding liabilities” than GM’s previous plan (Treasury 2009e). Further, the government 
stated that the company had “also secured commitments of meaningful sacrifice from all of 
its major stakeholder groups, sacrifices sufficient for this plan to proceed forward” 
(Treasury 2009e).  
The Restructuring and Debtor-in-Possession Financing 
As a result of the acceptability of the viability plan, the government determined to provide 
additional assistance to GM to help it restructure. On Sunday, May 31, 2009 , the Treasury 
announced that GM would file for bankruptcy the following day (Treasury 2009e). In a 
speech from the White House on Monday morning, President Obama indicated that GM 
would undergo a bankruptcy restructuring similar to that which Chrysler was just about to 
 
30 The AIFP called for the President to appoint a designee to oversee the government’s assistance to the auto 
industry. President Obama chose not to appoint a single individual as designee but instead created the 
President’s Auto Task Force to administration th is role. For further discussion, see “The Presidential Task 
Force on the Auto Industry.” 
31 By including the possibility of bankruptcy in this early notice, the administration may have sought to (1) 
favorably influence the negotiations with interested parti es such as creditors and the unions, (2) prepare 
shareholders, creditors and the markets for the possibility of bankruptcy, especially since it may have 
appeared that this option had been dismissed in light of the government’s intervention, and (3) to diff use 
possible negative reactions. 
318
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 22 ---
complete32 (Obama 2009b ). Th e process would occur under Section 363 of the US 
Bankruptcy Code. The expedited process would (1) allow GM to sell substantially all of its 
assets to a  newly formed corporation (“New GM”) that would continue t o operate the 
business, (2) give consideration to certain of its creditors in provisions of the sale, and (3) 
confirm a liquidation plan under Chapter 11 to wind down what remained of the company 
(“Old GM”) (Bosco and Plante 2013, 183, 186).  
In a traditional Chapter 11 process, a co mmittee of creditors negotiates a plan of 
liquidation or restructuring and then all creditors vote on the plan. This process can take 
substantial time and also generate significant administrative fees. A Section 36 3 sale allows 
debtors to “use, sell, or le ase” property of the estate “other than in the ordinary course of 
business” before the formalization of a plan of liquidation or reorganization, including the 
sale of substantially all of the debtor’s assets (Neyland and St. John 202 2, 3) The sale is 
subject to court approval and the purchaser acquires such assets “free and clear” of any 
liens. A sale may be approved and proceed despite creditor disagreement , and there are 
limited challenges a creditor can make against the sale. Because of the expedited nature of 
a Section 363 sale, the bankrupt estate is prevented from realizing some or all of the 
benefits that may accrue from holding onto the assets ; as some investments may generate 
positive returns in the period in which a plan is negoti ated, this may be particularly 
detrimental to claimants, such as  shareholders that benefit from any asset appreciation 
(Neyland and St. John 2022, 4–8).  
Both timeliness and costs were factors considered by the company, government, and 
creditors in analyzi ng and deciding upon the proposed GM Section 363 sale ( Bosco and 
Plante 2013, 183, 186). GM filed for bankruptcy in the Southern District of New York with 
an expedited timeline of approximately six weeks , due to be completed by July 10, 2009 . It 
was one of the largest bankruptcies of a US manufacturer in history  (GMC 2009 a; Bosco 
and Plante 2013, 186). 
In conjunction with GM’s restructuring, and because such financing was not available to GM 
commercially, the US government agreed to provide DIP financ ing of up to $30.1 billion to 
assist the company in going through the expedited Section 363 bankruptcy action to clear 
its liabilities and restructure ( Treasury 2009e; Dassin 2009 , 7–8). The government s of 
Canada and the province of Ontario also committed a loan, up to $9.5 billion, to GM and 
New GM (COP 2011, 21). See “Program Description: Canadian Participation in Assistance to 
Manufacturers” for more discussion of the role of Canada. 
  
 
32 See discussion at “Program Description: Assistance to Chrysler: The Restructuring and Debtor -in-
Possession Financing” and Nye 2021 for details of the Chrysler bankruptcy and restructuring. The Auto Task 
Force and Treasury Auto Team determined that Chrysler, the smaller company, should go through the Section 
363 process first as a test case. (Deese, Shafran and Jester 2020, 373-375). 
319
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 2: US Government Support to GM ($ billions)  
Item Amount 
Bridge Loan a  $13.4 
Working Capital Loansb 6.4 
DIP Financingc  30.1 
Total to GM $49.9 
Amount recovered 39.7 
Profit/(loss) (10.2) 
(a) Amounts include  any Additional Notes issued but e xclude Canadian governments’ participation  of  
$9.5 billion. 
(b) Includes an additional $361 million loan that GM repaid.  
(c) Reflects maximum amount committed by the government.  
Sources: Treasury n.d.b; Treasury 2009e; Treasury 2013b; COP 2011, 35–36. 
The bankruptcy process wiped out the value of GM’s equity shares , and its debt obligations 
were restructured. As part of the  process, the company committed to a plan to achieve and 
sustain long-term viability by making major changes in the areas of (1) reducin g average 
employee pay to bring it more in line with the foreign transplants, (2) off -loading 
unprofitable brands, and (3) committing to international competitiveness and energy 
efficient vehicles (COP 2009a; 21–27, 68–77).  
As a result of the bankruptcy, ownership in the post -bankruptcy New GM was shared 
between Treasury, GM’s creditors, the governments of Canada and the province of Ontario, 
and the Voluntary Employees' Beneficiary Association  (VEBA) of the United Auto Workers 
(UAW) union (which would absorb certain health care liabilities) as set forth in Figure 3.  
  
320
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 24 ---
Figure 3: Ownership of New GM Post-restructuring and Other Equity Interests 
Owner Equity Stake Preferred 
Stock Warrants # of Directors party may 
appoint 
Treasury* 60.80% $2.1 billion n/a 10 
UAW VEBA 17.50% $6.5 billion 
One warrant for 2.5% 
common stock once valuation 
hit $75 billion 
1 
The UAW VEBA Trust has 
the right to select one 
independent director, but no 
right to vote its shares nor 
any other governance rights. 
Canada and 
Ontario 11.70% $400 million n/a 1 
Old GM 
(unsecured 
bondholders) 
10.0% n/a 
Two warrants for 7.5% 
common stock each at 
discounted price once 
valuation hit $15 billion 
1 
 
Note: Sources report that there were 13 directors. We have assigned 1 to the Old GM unsecured bondholders, 
as we cannot confirm another holder of this spot. The other places were independently confirmed.  
Sources: Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 42; Gerber 2009, 18–19; Bosco and Plante 2013 , 185–186; COP 2009b, 15–
16, 24.  
Following formation of the New GM, the original $13.4 billion bridge loan and the $6.0 
billion working capital loan were terminated, including the associated warrants and 
additional notes. In consideration of these amounts and $19.9 billion of the GM DIP Loan, 
the US government received approximately 60 .8% of the equity of New GM  (COP 2011, 8, 
23). It chose to swap the existing loans for equity rather than weigh down New GM with 
substantial debt, which might  have negatively impacted New GM’s prospects , a standard 
practice in bankruptcy actions . Treasury  also received  approximately $7.1 billion in debt 
(including the $360 million liabilities for customer warranties) and $2.1 billion in preferred 
stock in New GM. Treasury had the right to appoint the initial directors of New GM, other 
than those to be selected by the VEBA and the Canadian governments (COP 2009b, 20). 
  
321
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 25 ---
Assistance to Chrysler 
The Bridge Loan 
On December 19, 2008, the day the government announced the GM Bridge Loan, it also 
announced that it had determined to provide a loan to Chrysler (the Chrysler Bridge Loan). 
The terms of the $4 billion Chrysler Bridge Loan, all of which was disbursed shortly 
thereafter, were very similar to  those of the GM Bridge Loan. It was secured by Chrysler’s 
assets (although its unencumbered assets were minimal) , carried a below-market interest 
rate (the greater of three-month LIBOR plus 3% and 5%), and it also required the company 
to submit a viability plan by February 20, 2009  (Chrysler 2008, PDF pp. 26, 143–145). The 
Chrysler Bridge Loan was for a period of three years but  subject to early termination in the 
event of default or if the compan y failed to timely submit an acceptable viability plan 
(Chrysler 2008, PDF pp. 8, 25 ,60; GM and Treasury 2008, PDF pp. 258–262). 
For reasons related to Chrysler’s private status —both that of the existing company (Old 
Chrysler) and the company that purchased most of Chrysler’s assets in the section 363 
bankruptcy and continued to operate under th e Chrysler name, New Chrysler—warrants 
were not considered a desirable option, so  Additional Notes were issued  as the additional 
security required under TARP . Treasury received a similar amount in Additional Notes, as 
it had in the GM case , representing 6.67% of the “Maximum Loan Amount”  of the loan (in 
other words, the $4 billion committed to Chrysler) (Chrysler 2008, PDF p. 142). This meant 
that Chrysler would owe approximately $4.3 billion in principal on the $4 billion Bridge 
Loan.  
The Viability Plan and Working Capital Loan 
As required, in February 2009, Chrysler submitted a viability plan.  However, after 
evaluation, on March 3 0 the Obama administration announced a position that was very 
different than the one it reached regarding GM. The administration rejected Chrysler’s 
viability plan and “determined that Chrysler has not demonstrated that it can achieve long -
term viability as a stand -alone company,” as required (Treasury 2009c, 3). The 
administration also concluded that Chrysler’s proffered plan to merge with Italian auto 
manufacturer Fiat Automobiles SpA was not sufficient ly developed to support further 
taxpayer investment ( Treasury 2009c, 1). Despite this conclusion, the government was 
willing to extend additional working capital to Chrysler for 30 days to see if it could , among 
other things, solidify a merger arrangement with Fiat  that met certain financial constraints 
and adequately protected taxpayers (Treasury 2009c, 1, 3–4).  
In more detail, the requirements to be met included: (1) restructuring Chrysler’s balance 
sheet to extinguish the vast majority of its secured debt and all of its unsecured debt and 
equity, other than to trade creditors; (2) further concessions from the UAW; (3) a more 
viable plan for profitably operating in a normal business environment; (4) an agreed plan 
with Fiat that would not require more than $6 billion of taxpayer investment to be 
successful; (5) a viable mechanism for dealer and customer financing;  and (6) a “credible 
plan” for implementing the restructuring (Treasury 2009c, 4). 
322
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 26 ---
If t he company was successful with these steps  in the allotted 30 -day period, the 
government would consider extending to it up to $6 billion in additional funds as requested 
in its viability plan to help th e partnership succe ed. However, President Obama and the 
Treasury also clearly stated that if Chrysler could not reach an  acceptable agreement with 
Fiat and its stakeholders , “we will not be able to justify investing additional tax dollars to 
keep Chrysler in business ” (Obama 2009a ). The President also stated that bankruptcy 
might be a useful tool to assist Chrysler in any restructuring so as to permit it to quickly get 
to a fresh start. (Obama 2009a).  
Following the March 30 announcement, the government assisted Chrysler in negotiating 
concessions from its major creditors and labor unions ( Nye 2022b, 8–9), and in firming up 
the terms of the Fiat partnership . After review of Chrysler’s revised viability plan, on April 
30, 2009, the government announced , concomitant with its announcement regarding GM’s 
restructuring initiative, that Chrysler had successfully sealed a merger deal with Fiat and 
satisfied sufficient other terms to support the government  in providing additional support 
of its restructuring (Treasury 2009e, 1).  
Figure 4: US Government Support to Chrysler ($ billions)a 
Item Amount 
Chrysler Bridge Loan  $4.0 
DIP Financingb 3.8 
Loan to New Chryslerc  4.6 
Total to Chrysler $12.4 
Amount recovered 11.2 
Profit/(loss) (1.2) 
(a) Includes any Additional Notes issued but excludes Canadian governments’ participation of approximately 
$1.1 billion.  
(b) The government committed up to $3.8 billion, of which New Chrysler drew $1.9 billion. 
(c) The Treasury originally committed up to $6.6 billion to New Chrysler ; of this amount , the company drew 
$4.58 billion, a figure which the Treasury used in later calculations of loss on the Chrysler transactions.  
Sources: Treasury 2013b; Treasury 2009a; COP 2011, 51. 
In the proposed merger with Fiat, the Italian company would contribute its operating and 
design expertise to the merger, agreed to continue to manufacture vehicles in the US , and 
be prohibited from increasing its ownership in the new company until Treasury ended its 
investment (Treasury 2009e, 1). Fiat would also largely manage the new company. 
323
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 27 ---
The Restructuring and Debtor-in-Possession Financing 
Because Chrysler had been unable to secure a compromise agreement from all its creditors, 
Chrysler would restructure through a Section 363 bankruptcy process, and the government 
intended for it to proceed with the action prior to the larger GM  bankruptcy, in effect, 
positioning the smaller company as a test case  (Treasury 2009e, 1). As with  GM, t he 
bankruptcy would enable the com pany to sell substantially all of its operating assets to a 
newly formed corporation (“New Chrysler”) and discharge substantially all of its liabilities, 
which would remain with the old company (“Old Chrysler”) , which was to b e wound down 
and liquidated under a Chapter 11 proceeding. Some of Chrysler’s creditors were also given 
consideration in provisions of the sale ( Bosco and Plante 2013 , 183 86). Additionally, 
through the bankruptcy, the value of Old Chrysler’s equity shares was wiped out. Creditors 
were compromised and would receive payout from the proceeds of the liquidated estate, 
including the proceeds from the Section 363 sale, as the Chapter 11 process proceeded.  
Because, as with GM, commercial DIP financing was not available  to Chrysler , the US 
government committed up to $3.8 billion in DIP financing to Chrysler for the bankruptcy 
process to proceed (Treasury 2013b). Old Chrysler eventually accessed $1.9 billion from 
Treasury (Treasury 2013b) and an additional C$1.3 billion (approximately $1 .1 billion33) 
from Canad ian authorities  (OAGC 2014, 9). The US commitment terminated on June 30, 
2009. Treasury wrote off the entire $1.9 billion in DIP  financing but ultimately recovered 
$160 million through the sale over time of the remaining collateral held by Old Chrysler  
(Treasury 2013b). Information on Export Development Canada ( EDC)’s recovery from its 
DIP lending commitments was unavailable. 
Treasury also committed to lend $6.6 billion to New Chrysler34 (the “New Chrysler loan”) to 
assist in fund ing its operations , a loan that was also secured by substantially all  of the 
company’s assets. Chrysler ultimately drew $4.6 billion on this facility (COP 2009a, 40, 50; 
Treasury 2009e). The loan took the form of a “term loan for working capital with $2.1 
billion due in 30 months and the balance 50% due on the 7th anniversary and 50% due on 
the 8th anniversary of the loan” (Treasury 2009e).  
As additional consideration  for the New Chrysler loan , Treasury received from New 
Chrysler 9.85% of its common stock (COP 2009b 27). As shown in Figure 5 the other post-
petition owners of New Chrysler were : (1) the U AW VEBA which received 68% of New 
Chrysler’s equity  for agreeing to restructure its $8.8 billion in unsecured claims against 
Chrysler, cutting Chrysler’s health care costs b y more than  40% in the process ( Rattner 
2011, 153 –154, 157) ; (2) Fiat, which received 20% for its contributions to the new 
 
33 Per Yahoo Finance, USD 1 = CAD 0.8516 on May 5, 2009. 
34 Of the Chrysler Bridge Loan, $500  million was also rolled into the New Chrysler loan. In addition, New 
Chrysler assumed $1.9 billion of that loan, and Treasury effectively wrote off $1.6 billion of the original $4 
billion bridge loan (COP 2011, 10–11, 39). 
 
324
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 28 ---
company (COP 2009b 27 ); and (3) the Canadian and Ontario governments for their 
financial participation, received 2.46 percent (COP 2009b 27).  
Figure 5: Post-Bankruptcy Ownership of New Chrysler 
Owner Common 
Stock  
(%) 
Other Equity Interests No. of 
Directors 
that Party 
May Elect 
UAW VEBA 67.69 n/a 1 
FIAT 20.00 Two warrants for 7.5% common stock 
each at discounted price once valuation  
hit $15 billion 
3 
US Treasury 9.85 n/a 4 
Canadian/Ontario 
governments 
2.46 n/a 1 
Source: Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 41; COP 2009b, 11. 
Chrysler entered bankruptcy on April 30, 2009, and New Chrysler exited on June 10, 2009  
(David 2010, 39) . New Chrysler , which would essentially be run by Fiat , began with $33 
billion in assets and $29 billion in liabilities (Chrysler 2011, 326).  
The agreements among the post -bankruptcy owners and the company contained several 
provisions that provided opportunities for Fiat to increase its ownership as incentives to 
pursue the company’s new business plan.  Treasury’s stake was diluted in the first h alf of 
2011 from 9.8 5% to 8.6% when Fiat, having met certain p erformance milestones, 
automatically increased its stake in the company from 20% to 30% and also exercised an 
equity call option to purchase an additional 16% interest in New Chrysler. In July 2 011, 
Fiat, through exercise of another  equity call option, purchased Treasury’s shares for $500 
million and paid an additional $60 million relating to rights that Treasury held with respect 
to the VEBA’s equity interests; which it did not have funding to acquire (Treasury 2011). 
Thus, while the receipt of equity anticipated that the Treasury and taxpayers might benefit 
from appreciation in New Chrysler’s stock price post-bankruptcy, such benefit was limited 
when compared with the results at GM due to the size of the government’s interest and the 
decision to use equity as an incentive for Fiat to succeed at the merger and availability of 
funds.  
The Presidential Task Force on the Auto Industry 
The GM and Chrysler Bridge Loans provided that a President’s Designee (who would be the 
Secretary of Treasury if the President did not appoint a Designee) would administer the 
loans, review , and evaluate the companies’ viability plans, and oversee  compliance 
325
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 29 ---
(Chrysler 2008, PDF pp. 19, 58-61, 68). The enabling law provided for a single President’s 
Designee; however, the President Bush declined to appoint a designee and therefore the 
role initially fell to Secretary of the Treasury Paulson (Rattner 2011, 32–35). 
On February 15, 2009, before the manufacturers’ viability plans were submitted, President 
Obama announced that the role of President’s Designee would be filled by the Presidential 
Task Force on the Auto Industry (the Task Force), perh aps in response to some negative 
public opinion regarding a “car czar” (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 49-50; Rattner 2011, 32–
33, 51–56, 63–66). The Task Force was co -chaired by Secretary of the Treasury Geithner, 
and director of the National Economic Council  Lawrence Summers (Klier and Rubenstein 
2012, 38–39; COP 2009b, 10–11). However, day-to-day administration of the Bridge Loans 
and other funding and staffing for the Task Force fell to the Treasury auto team (Auto 
Team), which was led by two appointed advi sers, Ron Bloom and Steven Rattner 35 (COP 
2009b, 10 -11; Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 38–39). The Auto Team reported to the Task 
Force and its co-chairs, who then reported up to the President (COP 2009b, 10–11) 
The Task Force enjoyed wide -ranging administrative leverage over the restructuring 
process through its ability to review a number of company actions and its power to trigger 
the loan s’ termination by determining the acceptability of the companies’ viability plans 
(Chrysler 2008, PDF pp. 19, 58–61, 68). Specifically, the Task Force had the authority to 
approve bonuses to senior employees, reject transactions of more than  $100 million, 
approve material changes to the company expense policy, generally oversee compliance 
with the terms of the loa ns, and negotiate the terms of any further assistance  (Chrysler 
2008, PDF pp. 19, 41, 53–61).  
Canadian Participation in Assistance to Manufacturers 
The Canadian operations of both GM and Chrysler were highly integrated with the 
companies’ US operations. “Approximately 85 percent of cars produced in Canada [were] 
exported, and these exports [were] sent almost exclusively to the United States. Exported 
vehicles and parts represent [ed] about 15 percent of Canada’s manufactured product 
exports” (OAGC 2014, 3). Moreover, the Canadian supplier network was integrated 
similarly to that in the US, with suppliers also supporting healthier manufacturers with a 
risk of contagion if any of these suppliers were to fail due to GM’s or Chrysler’s demise. The 
developing economic impacts of the financial crisis negatively affected Canada’s auto 
production and employment in ways similar to the effects in the US, including slower sales 
and increased difficulty in financing  (OAGC 2014, 4). As the industry accounted for 
 
35 Ron Bloom was a former investment banker and adviser to the president of the United Steelworkers union, 
and Steven Rattner was the co -founder of the Quadrangle Group, a private equity firm. The auto team was 
“was notable for not including any individual w ith close ties to the auto industry” (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 
39). Rattner exited the Treasury Auto Team on July 13, 2009, leaving Bloom as the team’s leader (COP 2009b, 
10–11) 
326
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 30 ---
approximately 1.5 percent of the Canadian gross domestic product in 2007, the 
government wanted to forestall any further ill effects (OAGC 2014, 1–6). 
Therefore, in late 2008, the Canadian federal and Ontario provincial governments became 
concerned about the impact that a GM or Chrysler failure would have on their economies 
and in 2009 joined the US government in offering financial assistance to Chrysler Canada 
and GM Canada, subsidiaries of the US companies , through participation in the US 
government’s agreements with the parent companies.  
Canada’s investments in GM, targeted to ensure continued production in Canada totaled  
C$13.7 billion with C$10.8 billion going to GM companies and C$2.9 billion going to 
Chrysler companies as shown in  Figure 836 (OAGC 2014, 9 ; GM 2010 , 55). The Canadian 
governments also participated in negotiations with stakeholders prior to the bankruptcy 
filings with a focus on maintaining production in Canada.  
A portion of the loans to GM Canada, $1.5  billion, was repayable and was repaid (OAGC 
2014, 12). The parties agreed that the majority of l oans made by the federal and provincial 
governments, valued at approximately C$9.8 billion, would be converted into 16million 
preferred shares and 175  million common shares  of New GM  (OAGC 20 14, 12) . The 
Canadian governments also received the right to select one director of New GM  as long as 
they held their equity (COP 2009b, 20).  
In 2014, the Canadian government transferred approximately 37 million common shares to 
Ontario. The government sold the remaining common shares in a series of transactions 
between 2013 and 2015 and reported that it recognized gains in value of C$4.3 billion from 
the common shares (CDEV 2016, 2). On December 31, 2014, GM repurchased the preferred 
shares at the liquidation preference value of $25 per share (USD) for a total of C$466,989 
(CDEV 2016, 33).  
As shown in Figure 5 and discussed in the “Program Description: Assistance to Chrysler” 
section the Canadian governments also provided assistance to the Chrysler companies with 
a loan of C$1.6 billion to Canada Chrysler and of $1.3 billion to Old Chrysler . The loan to 
Chrysler was converted into 2. 46 percent of New Chrysler’s common  shares and the right 
to select on e director as long as they held the equity  (see Figure  5; COP 2009b 27). 
Information on the further recovery of the  Canadian loans or the outcome of the New 
Chrysler shares was unavailable at this writing.  
 
36 The federal and provincial governments agreed to provide two -thirds and one -third, respectively, of the 
Canadian share of assistance to the companies (OAGC 2014, 5). Canadian investments were made through 
Export Development Canada (EDC), Canada’s export c redit agency, on behalf of the governments of Canada 
and the Province of Ontario (COP 2009b, 28, 159). 
327
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 6: Total Loans to Chrysler and General Motors from Canada and Ontario 
 
Source: OAGC 2014, exhibit 5.3. 
In addition, in 2008 , the Canadian government establi shed the Automotive Innovation 
Fund which was designed to provide up to C$250 billion over five years to eligible 
automotive, engineering, and research firms to support “strategic, large-scale research and 
development (R&D) projects to build innovative, greener, more fuel -efficient vehicles” and 
the competitiveness of the Canadian automotive industry (Canada n.d.).  
Assistance to Related Segments of the Auto Industry 
Assistance to Auto Finance Companies 
GMAC/Ally Financial. Over 2008 and 2009, Treasury invested $17.2 billion in GMAC equity, 
and the company was approved to convert to a bank holding company on an expedited 
basis, after which it participated in broad-based programs of the Federal Reserve  (the 
Term Auction Facili ty, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility , and the Term Asset-Backed 
Securities Loan Facility [TALF]) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) (the 
Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program) (Ally Financial 2011, 37; Treasury n.d.d; Federal 
Reserve 2008). Also of note, an expansion of the TALF,37 which provided financing for ABS, 
including those backed by auto loans, was designed to help restore liquidity to GMAC’s auto 
 
37 The TALF had been introduced on November 25, 2008, by the Federal Reserve with TARP backing from the 
Treasury and was designed to encourage lending to businesses and households, the issuance of securities 
backed by privately originated loans to consumers and businesses, and to improve market conditions for 
asset-backed securities, including those backed by auto loans (GAO 2009b, 33). Under the program, t he Fed 
provided financing to investors to purchase new issues of eligible ABS, including small business loans, auto 
loans, student loans, and credit card loans. (GAO 2009b, 33). Up to $1 trillion in lending was authorized with 
up to $100 billion coming from TARP. (GAO 2009b, 33). 
328
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 32 ---
finance business. 38 Although there was some concern that the TALF’s required triple-A 
rating would exclude some securities of the auto finance companies, GMAC successfully 
utilized the program. For example , it reported that for the first quarter of 201 0, of six 
transactions securitizing more than $5 billion of automotive -related assets, all but one for 
$909 million were offered under TALF (GAO 200 9b, 33 ; Ally Financial 2010 b, 93) . (For 
detailed discussion s of assistance to GMAC  see COP 2010 and Matsumoto and Nygaard 
2022.)  
Chrysler Financial.  In the autumn of 2008, Chrysler’s related finance  company, Chrysler 
Financial, was also in dire straits, and its legal relationship with Chrysler created significant 
mechanical problems for the restructuring of Chrysler , which Treasury helped to resolve.  
Given the factors discussed earlier and the need to provide a source of continued financing 
for Chrysler dealers and customers, in December 2008, the government provided Chrysler 
Financial $1.5 billion in low -interest financing to fund the securitization of new consumer 
car loans. 39 Although the loans bore a 5 -year term, the program lasted only from January 
16, 2009 , to April 9, 2009, as Chrysler Financial paid off the loans early through 
participation in the TALF.  
Chrysler entered bankruptcy shortly after the completion of the $1.5 billion facility, and 
most of Chrysler Financial’s business was expected to be taken over by GMAC . Chrysler 
Financial would be replaced  as Chrysler’s auto finance partner contingent on Treasury ’s 
providing a capital injection to GMAC, various regulatory approvals,  and Chrysler’s meeting 
several milestones in the bankruptcy court by a specified date (Treasury 2009d; COP 2010, 
27, 49 ; Keegan 2009, 4 ; Chrysler LLC 2009 , 6).  Chrysler Financial did continue to do 
business, albeit at a much smaller scale.  In early 2010, Treasury exited from its interests in 
Chrysler Financial (COP 2011, 117 –118). (For a detailed discussion of assistance for 
Chrysler Financial see Nye 2022c.)  
Assistance to Auto Parts Suppliers 
Because of concerns about the auto manufacturers’ ability to pay their bills, parts suppliers 
were experiencing difficulty borrowing from banks using their receivables a s collateral. To 
address this concern, o n March 19, 2009 , the Treasury announced the Auto Supplier 
Support Program (ASSP) as an auxiliary program to the AIFP ( Treasury 2009a). The ASSP 
established two bankruptcy -remote special purpose vehicles (SPVs), one for GM and one 
for Chrysler, to purchase eligible receivables from participating suppliers at a modest 
discount, with the suppliers being chosen to participate by the manufacturers 40 (SIGTARP 
 
38 This is an example of how in a crisis, officials reach to use any variety of available tools to solve a problem, 
often utilizing more than one type. Also see Footnote 14. 
39 Note that this secured loan to Chrysler Financial contra sts with the unsecured equity support to GMAC. We 
have not been able to determine why this difference was made.  
40 The use of the SPVs was a creative structuring that facilitated the separation of the funds and control of the 
choice of suppliers aided by th e manufacturers. However, this later factor was one notable criticism of the 
ASSP— was that the government permitted the manufacturers to choose which suppliers participated. This 
 
329
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 33 ---
2009a, 89, 91 ). The SPVs were funded through a cash contribution from the auto 
manufacturer equal to 5% of the  amount allocated to them under the ASSP , with the 
balance of the program being funded by a TARP loan from Treasury (SIGTARP 2009a, 89).  
The government committed up to $5 billion to the ASSP as shown in Figure 7, but only part 
of this was allocated to GM and Chrysler, the two participating manufacturers.  
Figure 7: Funding of SPVs for the Auto Supplier Support Program 
 
Created by YPFS. Source: SIGTARP 2010, 278. 
The program outcomes were considered mixed , and its specific role in reducing the 
pressure on US auto parts suppliers is difficult to determine. Among other issues, there was 
some dissension on the manufacturers ’ getting to choose which suppliers were helped and 
also on the terms of the financing. The ASSP was terminated in April 2010, after all loans 
made under the program were repaid (SIGTARP 2010, 151). The Treasury collected $115.9 
million in interest and fees from the ASSP (SIGTARP 2010, 151). 
Auto Warranty Commitment Program  
On March 30, 2009 , President Obama also announced government -funded protection for 
consumer warranties on GM and Chrysler vehicles purchased while they underwent 
restructuring ( Treasury 2009b; Obama 2009 b). The new Auto Warranty Commitment 
Program (AWCP) was intended to “give consumers who [were] considering new car 
purchases the confidence that even in this difficult economic period, their warrantees 
[would] be honored” ( Treasury 2009b, 1 ). Although the AWCP was announced in direct 
support of GM and Chrysler,  participation was open to all domestic automakers ( Treasury 
2009b, 2 ). GM and Chrysler, however, were the only two manufacturers who chose to 
participate (Treasury 2009b, 1).  
 
was perceived by some as too narrow a focus, but it was consistent with the government’s intent to maintain 
a narrow perimeter on the rescue focused on stabilizing the two manufacturers. This decision also likely 
helped avoid much political lobbying on behalf of various suppliers.  
330
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 34 ---
While sometimes referred to as a “government guarantee,” technically, under the  AWCP, 
the government did not provide a guarantee. Under the AWCP , GM and Chrysler each 
established a special purpose vehicle to hold the program funds, which were to equal 125% 
of the expecte d cost o f paying warranty claims on each covered vehicle  they sold . Each 
manufacturer contributed 15% of the expected costs to the SPV in cash and  funded the 
remaining 110% with a Treasury loan41 (GAO 2009b, 14; Treasury 2009b, 1–2).  
Figure 8: Auto Warranty Commitment Program Funding ($ millions) 
Company Company 
Contribution Treasury Loan 
GM 63.6  360.6  
Chrysler 49.4 280.1 
Total $113.0  $640.7 
Source: Authors’ calculations. 
The Treasury loans  carried an interest rate of the greater of 550 basis points  (bps) or 
LIBOR plus 350 bps. GM and Chrysler each issued to Treasury addi tional promissory notes 
for 6.67% of the value of any advances drawn upon under the AWCP . The loans were also 
secured by a commensurate stake in GM and Chrysler’s warranty SPVs 42 and by “Guaranty 
Collateral” that included a security interest in all of the collateral owned by the relevant 
warranty SPV (Henken 2022, 8). The SPV was to be administered not by the manufacturer 
but by a third party with funding from the TARP program (Treasury n.d. 3). 
In the event a manufacturer went out of business or otherwise became unable to meet its 
warranty obligations, the SPV would appoint (with Treasury’s approval) one or more third-
party program administrators to assume the manufacturer’s warranty liabilities and to be 
paid through the funding held by the SPV (GAO 2009, PDF 19; Treasury n.d.3, 2). 
The AWCP was established when sales were at their absolute worst.  Sales picked up some 
while the companies were in bankruptcy but  did not really start recovering until the 
bankruptcies were completed. On July 10, 2009, both companies had emerged from 
bankruptcy, and although other obligations to the government remained outstanding, GM 
and Chrysler paid back all AWCP loan principal , while Chrysler also paid $5.5 million in 
interest (Treasury 2009b) . The program subsequently closed without either company 
having cal led upon the warranty support  (SIGTARP 2009b, 91).  It is not clear why GM’s 
 
41 Structuring the AWCP using SPVs and a loan to t he manufacturer permitted the government to “support” 
the warranties of new vehicles without absorbing an unknown and or unlimited risk. It also allowed the 
government’s loans to be supported by the new companies and secured by their assets.  
42 While Treasury funding to GM and Chrysler for the AWCP was structured as a loan, the funding was used to 
“capitalize” their SPVs, and so in return Treasury received a commensurate stake in each SPV (Henken 2022, 
8). 
331
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 35 ---
interest obligations from the warranty loan were not paid (TARP Transaction Reports).  See 
Henken 2022 for discussion of the warranty programs. 
The Canadian government also establis hed a warranty -support program similar to the US 
Auto Warranty Commitment Program “to increase consumer confidence and encourage 
Canadians to buy new cars” ( Canada 2009 ). The program applied to vehicles purchased 
while GM and Chrysler restructured.  Data on  the separate amounts targeted for this 
program are not available (Henken 2022, 13–14). (See discussion of the AWCP in “Program 
Description: Assistance to Related Segments of the Auto Industry” and in Henken 2022 for 
more details of the AWCP.) 
Outcomes  
The Section 363 Bankruptcies 
Despite the large size and complex nature of the GM and Chrysler Section 363 bankruptcy 
proceedings, they were successfully completed in record timeframes with the new 
companies exiting the process and continuing to o perate even while the legacy companies 
liquidated their remaining assets pursuant to Chapter 11  proceedings (Bosco and Plante  
2013, 187). 
The use of the expedited process was challenged and criticized by a number of creditors 
and legal scholars. Their argu ments included: (1) the pace of the bankruptcy was too fast 
(Roe and Skeel 2009 , 1 -3); (2) the bidding procedures were too narrow to include a 
genuine bid from anyone besides the government ( Roe and Skeel 2009, 16–18); (3) Section 
363 was not meant to compromise tort claims , such as product liability and warranty 
claims, which were not absorbed by the new companies  (Bosco and Plante 2013, 186–188; 
Roe and Skeel 2009, 2); (4) the UAW was unduly favored over other unions and creditors 
(Bosco and Plante 20 13, 186–88); and (5) the US government’s secured debt (and that of 
the governments of Canada and Ontario) should have been  recharacterized as equity, 
giving it a lower priority (Gerber 2009, 47).43 
It should be noted, that the  arguments all failed in sever al court cases (or were considered 
moot and not decided) , and that challenges to the GM bankruptcy  had the benefit of the 
favorable Chrysler decisions as precedent, 44 a fortunate o utcome of the government’s 
 
43 For contrast, see Lubben 2009 for a discussion of why, despite the arguments against them, the Chrysler 
and GM bankruptcies “are entirely within the mainstream of chapter 11 practice” (102 –103).  
44 Judge Gerber remarked in the GM case: “Here this Court has the benefit of the decisions of Bankruptcy 
Judge Gonzalez in the Chrysler chapter 11 cases—affirmed by the Second Circuit, for substantially the reasons 
Judge Gonzalez set forth in his opinion —on facts extraordinarily similar to those here" (Gerber 2009, 28). See 
Gonzalez 2009a (Plaintiff had no standing  to challenge the use of TARP funds) and Gonzalez 2009b (Opinion 
approving the Chrysler Section 363 sale). The opinions were affirmed by the 2nd Circuit in (Indiana State 
Police Pension Trust v. Chrysler LLC 2009b) ( affirmed for substantially the reasons s tated in the opinions in 
the lower court) and the Supreme Court refused to hear a related appeal challenging the bankruptcy (Klier 
 
332
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 36 ---
strategy to have the smaller Chrysler go through the process first. 45 (See Gerber 2009, 22–
24, for the court’s ruling and reasoning in favor of the “need for speed” with respect to the 
GM bankruptcy.) 
The Government’s Resolution 
The overarching goal of the  government’s intervention was to sustain GM and Chrysler so 
that the companies could restructure in a way that positioned them to return to 
profitability. This goal was achieved with respect to both companies.  
General Motors. New GM produced a profit in 2010, the year following its restructuring (GM 
2009a; Hirsch 2011 ) and for most of the following decade ( Macrotrends LLC. n.d. ). The 
New GM initial public offering ( IPO), one of the largest in US history, in which the 
government sold its first significant stake in the company, was completed above the initial 
target price and the government was able to sell more shares than it had initially 
anticipated. However, in aggregate, the government  recovered only $39.7 b illion with 
respect to its assistance to GM that began in December 2008 and wound down in December 
of 2013 (Treasury 2013a; Treasury 2013b; Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 42).  
Figure 9: US AIPF Funding Level ($ billions) 
Component  GM Chrysler Total 
Bridge Loans  13.4 4.0_ 17.4 
Working Capital Loans 6.4 a 4.6 b 11.0 
DIP Loans  30.1 3.8c 33.9 
Assistance related to GMAC/Ally Financial 17.2 –_ 17.2 
Assistance to Chrysler Financial – 1.5_ 1.5 
Supplier Support Program 0.3 0.1_ 0.4 
Warranty Commitment Program c 0.4 0.3_ 0.7 
Total $82.1 
(a) Includes an additional $361 million loan that GM repaid.  
(b) Includes working capital loan to New Chrysler. 
(c) The government committed up t $3.8 billion, of which New Chrysler drew $1.9 billion . 
Sources: Treasury 2009e; Treasury 2013b; COP 2011, 51. 
 
and Rubenstein 2012, 40 –41; Indiana State Police Pension Trust v. Chrysler LLC 2009a) (temporary stay 
vacated and further stay denied).  
45 Given the relative sizes of the two companies, the government’s Auto Team determined to have Chrysler go 
through the Section 363 bankruptcy process first as a test case to permit any troublesome areas to be 
identified and possibly corrected o r attended to before the larger GM proceeded. Because the Chrysler 
procedure was successful, the result was also favorable precedential case law that supported the GM sale.  
333
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 37 ---
Chrysler. Chrysler returned to profitability in 2010, and repaid its government loans by 
mid-2011, several years ahead of schedule. ( COP 2011, 20; Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 48). 
The company rebounded better than expected , rolling out new products and gaining 
market share. ( Klier and Rubenstein 2012 , 48). However, including interest received , the 
US government experienced a $1.3 billion loss on its assistance to Chrysler ( Klier and 
Rubenstein 2012, 41–42). 
GMAC. Between December 2008 and December 2009, the US Treasury invested more than 
$17.2 billion in capital in GMAC ( Treasury 2014). The final sale of Treasury’s equity in 
GMAC was completed on December 19, 2014 ( Treasury 2014). The total return on the 
series of investments was $19.6 billion, a taxpayer profit of $2.4 billion, including dividends 
the Treasury received on the preferred shares between 2009 and 2014 (Treasury 2014). 
Impacts of the Restructurings 
Both GM and Chrysler emerged from their restructuring s with much reduced debt,  
unburdened by significant legacy liabilities, and more efficient streamlined businesses and 
operating structures. ( Klier and Rubenstein 2012 , 42–43, 48, 50 ). Among the principal 
drivers of the return to profits for both companies was the reduction in fixed costs, driven 
by reductions in hourly labor costs, total number of employees, number of manufacturing 
plants, health insurance costs, expensive liabilities, and the overall break-even number of 
vehicle sales ( Klier and Rubenstein  2012, 42 –48). For example, GM had a much lower 
break-even point, it had to sell only 19 percent market share or 2.09 million cars to break 
even, down from a 25 percent share and 3.88 million cars in 2007  (Klier and Rubenstein 
2012, 43; COP 2011, 32). 
Overall, not only were the restructuring s judged to be positive in the short  term, but they 
were also thought to have laid foundational changes that could continue to benefit the 
companies in the long  term. Klier and Rubenstein found that although the restruct urings 
resulted in plant closings and significant employment reductions in the industry —down 34 
percent in vehicle assembly and 32 percent in parts production between 2007  and 2009—
such changes improved the industry’s capacity utilization. “Since capacity utilization is a 
key driver of profitability for carmakers, the unprecedented number of assembly plant 
closures during the recent restructuring [enabled]  carmakers [including GM and Chrysler] 
to achieve profitability at historically low output levels” (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 45).  
Another development Klier and Rubenstein cited was the Detroit Three ’s gain in market 
share in 2011, marking a first since 1995. Chrysler and GM  increased their market share 
from 9.3 percent in 2010 to 10.7 percent in  2011 and from 19.1 percent to 19.7 percent, 
respectively, and notably, they gained momentum in the passenger car sector  “after three 
decades of having ceded most of the high -volume family car market to the Japanese 
carmaker” (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 47).  
One other major change post -restructuring was that in 2011 labor negotiations resulted in 
the Detroit Three and the UAW ’s agreement on new variable pay structures that made 
334
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 38 ---
“Detroit’s labor costs [ . . . ] competitive with foreign producers operating wit hin North 
America” (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 48). 
Although the government did not recover the full amount of what it invested, there is 
consensus that the restructurings were an overall success and of great benefit to the 
country: “It is hard to argue th at this decision did not deliver important economic benefits 
to the recovery and country.  If GM and Chrysler had been allowed to fail, in all likelihood 
the Great Recession would have been deeper and longer, and the recovery that began in 
mid-2009 would have been weaker” (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 4). By contrast, aided by 
a greater than expected rebound in consumer demand for vehicles, the restructurings 
exceeded expectations, especially with respect to Chrysler, which was at first considered to 
be less important (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 4).  
Additionally, beyond the individual companies, the auto industry in total contributed 
significantly during the recovery, “punching above its weight” (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 
20). Five years into the recove ry, the auto industry accounted for more than 25 percent of 
the increase in manufacturing even though the industry comprised only about 6 percent of 
total manufacturing production. And since bottoming at 623,300 jobs at the trough of the 
recession in June 2009, employment in the motor vehicles and parts manufacturing 
industry ha d increased by 256,000 jobs (as of July 2014), fully 60 percent of all new 
manufacturing jobs. Vehicle and parts d ealers added an additional 225,000  jobs (Goolsbee 
and Krueger 2015, 20). Together the industry added a full 6 percent of all new jobs added 
during the first five years of recovery, three times its 2 percent share of total employment  
and far from the 1 million jobs predicted to be lost if GM and Chrysler had failed (Goolsbee 
and Krueger 2015, 8). 
Canadian Outcomes.  Chrysler Canada repaid its C$1.6 billion loan to the Canadian and 
Ontario governments in May 2011 ( OAGC 2014, 12). Old Chrysler’s DIP loan of C$1.28 
billion made in support of its bankruptcy was reduced to approximately C$1.2 billion in 
2011 following the sale of Chrysler shares held by the government to Fiat, but as of 2014 
had not been repaid ( OAGC 2014 , 13). The most -recent public va luation of  outstanding 
commercial loans to the auto sector that remained in arrears showed a total of C$1.15 
billion still owed to the federal government as of March 2017 ( Beeby 2018). In 2018, the 
government reported that it had written off a loan of this size, but officials did not confirm 
the loans were to Chrysler (Beeby 2018). 
The two Canadian subsidiaries did not  go through bankruptcy; they remained subsidiaries 
of the New GM and New Chrysler. However, overall, the automobile industry in Canada was 
negatively affected by the general effects of the fin ancial crisis and the specific impacts of 
the restructurings of the GM and Chrysler US parent companies. The industry accounted for 
approximately 1.5 percent of the Canadian gross domestic product in 2007 compared with 
about 1.1 percent in 2013  (OAGC 2014, 4). In 2007, car manufacturers and parts suppliers 
employed 152,000 people, compared to employment of 117,000 people in 2013  (OAGC 
2014, 4). As of May 2014, the Automotive Innovation Fund had committed to a maximum of 
C$310 million for six approved projects, of  which C$131 million had been paid. ( OAGC 
2014, 7). 
335
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 39 ---
III. Key Design Decisions  
1. What factors influenced the government’s determination that the auto industry 
posed a systemic risk to the financial system?  
Government efforts to assist the auto industry were not predicated on a potential systemic 
risk to the financial system, but rather on consideration of broader risk to the economy and 
stimulus efforts. Government opinion on whether to provide assistance to avoid  the failure 
of GM and Chrysler was mixed. In writing about the government intervention in the auto 
industry, members of the Bush and Obama administrations Brian Deese, Steven Shafran, 
and Dan Jester point out that : “This was different from the rescues of financial institutions 
like A merican Intern ational Group (AIG), which posed an immediate systemic risk to 
markets and the economy. Instead , this rescue was, in effect , an extension of o ur broader 
effort to blunt the worst effects of an economy in freefall and provide stimulus to accelerate 
an economic recovery” (Deese, Shafran, and Jester 2020, 359–360).  
Ron Bloom , a Treasury Department official and adviser to the Tas k Force, also cited the 
rare circumstance in which events occurred: 
If a company of General Motors’ or Chrysler’s size and scale had failed in a healthy 
economy, they would have been able to be reorganized . . . Companies fail all the time.  
The dilemma we faced with GM and Chrysler is the financial system itself had basically 
frozen. There was no credit available . . . If the gover nment had not been prepared to 
provide them with debtor-in-possession financing . . . there’s no doubt in my mind they 
would have liquidated . . . These companies sit at the top of the manufacturing industry 
pyramid. There are literally millions of jobs th at are directly or indirectly tied to 
General Motors and to Chrysler. The argument for saving these auto manufacturers is 
essentially not about saving them; it's about saving the industry (Bloom 2022). 
Factors the government cited in defense of  the decision to provide support focused on the 
likely impacts of the companies’ failures on an already weakened economy:  
• the risk of 1.1 million workers losing their jobs, including workers from auto 
suppliers and dealers, 
• estimates of a 1 percent reduction in real GDP growth,  
• crippling effects on the auto suppliers and dealers,  
• destabilizing impacts o n the communities  dependent on the plants and 
workers, and 
• the possibility that the government would have to absorb the pension 
obligations of tens of thousands of dislocated workers (Deese, Shafran , and 
Jester 2020, 361; White House 2008).  
336
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 40 ---
However, it should also be noted that the politically charged climate surrounding the  
government’s rescue efforts for the financial sector, which would later develop into a “Wall 
Street vs. Main Street” dichotomy, had begun to appear in early 2009 and might have also 
influenced the Obama administration’s decision to support manufacturing jobs.  
2. What was the government’s purpose for intervening? 
The government’s initial purpose for intervening was to provide just enough support to GM 
and Chrysler to forestall their failure and buy time for the companies and the government 
to decide on a solution that would, it was hoped,  put the companies on the p ath to long -
term viability. As stated by Secretary Paulson at the time of announcing the Bridge Loans  in 
December 2008: 
Today we have acted to support Chrysler  and General Motors, with the requirement 
that they move quickly to develop and adopt acceptable plans for long-term viability. 
This step will prevent significant disruption to our economy, while putting the 
companies on a path to the significant restructuring necessary to achieve long term 
viability. At the same time, we are including loan provisions  to protect the taxpayers to 
the maximum extent possible (White House 2008). 
The decision was heavily influenced by the fact the failure of the manufacturers was 
occurring not only in the midst of a burgeoning financial crisis but also amid a presidential 
transition (Deese, Shafran , and Jester 20 20, 361). The Bush administration (which 
originally looked to Congress to provide assistance ; Congress did not) wanted to maintain 
the companies through the transition so that the Obama administration could determine 
the long-term plan.  
Once in office , the Obama administration chose to continue to support the companies  to 
avoid their disorderly bankruptcies and to assist them in developing a s quickly as possible 
workable restructuring plan s that would put th em on the road to long -term viabi lity 
(Deese, Shafran, and Jester 2020, 372–374; Treasury 2013a).  
Both administrations sought to minimize the duration of hands-on government support to 
avoid potential political pressures to intervene more  intrusively in the management of 
these companies—for example, by compelling the companies to produce more fuel-efficient 
cars or influencing decisions regarding which plants to close (Deese, Shafran , and Jester 
2020, 360).   
3.  What legal authority supported the government’s intervention? 
No funding was specifically passed to support the auto industry. The AIFP—including the 
funding to the manufacturers,  for the auto suppliers, for the auto finance companies, and 
for the warranty programs—was funded out of the TARP (COP 2009 b, 201–203). At the 
337
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 41 ---
time of the company’ s initial requests for assistance in October 2008, the TARP  had just 
been enacted , but the Bush administration was not inclined to assist the auto companies 
using TARP fu nds. There were credible arguments that the law had been passed with 
assistance to the financial industry in mind 46 and uncertainty as to whether assistance to 
the manufacturers fell under the purview of the law (COP 2009b, 72 –74). At one point , 
President Bush and Secretary Paulson  both were of the opinion that it did not (COP 2009b, 
115; see also discussion at COP 2009b, 72–74).  
However, after Congress declined to provide targeted funds, the President and Secretary 
Paulson consulted Treasury co unsel and revisited the possibility of using TARP. In 
announcing the AIFP, Secretary Paulson stated: 
Treasury will make these loans using authority provided for the Troubled Asset Relief 
Program [TARP]. While the purpose of this program and the enabling legislation is to 
stabilize our financial sector, the authority allows us to take this action. Absent 
congressional action, no other authorities existed to stave off a disorderly bankruptcy 
of one or more auto companies (Paulson 2008a). 
In broad terms, TARP authorized the Secretary of the Treasury to purchase “troubled 
assets” from “financial institutions.” The statutory definitions are descriptive rather than 
restrictive.47 For example, although the definition of “financial institutions ” does not 
mention manufacturers, it does encompass “any institution, including, but not limited to any 
bank, savings association, credit union, security broker or dealer, or insurance company, 
established and regulated under the laws of the United States or any State  [emphasis 
added].”48 “Troubled assets” are defined as  certain mortgages and mortgage -related 
 
46 For example, all the descriptive entities included in the operative definition ar e financial organizations. 
“Whether Treasury had the legal authority to use TARP funds to bail out Chrysler and GM is the subject of 
considerable debate. There was, however, enough ambiguity in the TARP legislation, and there continues to 
be ambiguity abou t congressional intent, so that Treasury has faced no effective challenge to its decision to 
use TARP funds for this purpose” (COP 2009b, 5). Also see COP 2009b, pages 78 –79 for a discussion of 
Congressional intent.  
47 Given the uncertain nature of financial crises, drafting legislation or regulatory amendments broadly as was 
done with TARP through its descriptive rather than restrictive definitions and inclusion of a clear mechanism 
for bringing other securities within its purview has the benefit of provid ing tools for addressing 
unanticipated developments. Several of the government officials we interviewed expressed the opinion that 
without TARP, there would have been no way to rescue the auto industry. Steven Rattner, who was head of 
the President Obama’s Auto Taskforce saw it this way: “We had, under the Bush administration,  TARP money, 
intended mostly for the banks, but it was available to us, and that allowed us to put money in these companies 
without going through Congress, and that was an important pi ece . . . It’s a disaster . . . if you have to go to 
Congress . . . Once you bring Congress into the equation, it makes it a lot more complicated. There’s no 
question about it” (Rattner 2022, 4).  
48 The relevant TARP definition of ‘‘financial institution’’  is “any institution, including, but not limited to, any 
bank, savings association, credit union, security broker or dealer, or insurance company, established and 
regulated under the laws of the United States or any State, territory, or possession of the U nited States, the 
District of Columbia, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, 
American Samoa, or the United States Virgin Islands, and having significant operations in the United States, 
 
338
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 42 ---
securities and “any other financial instrument  [emphasis added]” that the Secretary of t he 
Treasury determines, in accordance with procedures set out in the statute, “the purchase of 
which is necessary to promote financial market stability.”49 
TARP also contained a clear mechanism by which the Secretary could make determinations 
that unenumerated financial instruments were within its purview.  Secretary Paulson  
utilized this mechanism when he, in consultation with the Chairman of the Federal Reserve  
as required,  determined that TARP could be used for the auto industry.  In so doing, the 
Secretary determined that (1) the auto compa nies engaged in manufacturing vehicles and 
providing credit in connection with such vehicles were “financial institutions under Section 
3(5) of the law ,”50 and (2) that the obligations  of such companies were necessary to 
promote stability to the financial system  and as such were “troubled assets” under 12 USC 
5202, Section 3(9)(b). The determination reads in part: 
WHEREAS, certain thrift and other holding companies which are engaged in the 
manufacturing of automotive vehicles and the provision of credit and financing in 
connection with the manufacturing and purchase of such vehicles have applied under 
the TARP Systemically Significant Failing Institutions Program (the “SSFI”) requesting 
that the Department of the Treasury purchase obligations of such companies 
consistent with the SSFI; 
WHEREAS, such thrift and other holding companies engaged in the manufacturing of 
automotive vehicles and the provision of credit and financing in connection wi th the 
manufacturing and purchase of such vehicles are “Financial Institutions” for purposes 
of section 3(5) of the Act as they are “institution[s] established and regulated under the 
laws of the United States and have significant operations in the United States; and  
WHEREAS, as Secretary, I have consulted with the Chairman, and we have jointly 
concluded that the TARP’s purchase of the obligations is necessary to promote stability 
to the financial system of the United States. 
NOW, THEREFORE, I HERE BY DETER MINE that the obligations of such financial 
 
but excluding any central bank  of, or institution owned by, a foreign government” (12 USC 5202, Section 
3[5]).  
49 TARP defines “troubled assets” as  “(A) residential or commercial mortgages and any securities, obligations, 
or other instruments that are based on or related to such mortga ges, that in each case was originated or 
issued on or before March 14, 2008, the purchase of which the Secretary determines promotes financial 
market stability; and (B) any other financial instrument that the Secretary, after consultation with the 
Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, determines the purchase of which is 
necessary to promote financial market stability, but only upon transmittal of such determination, in writing, 
to the appropriate committees of Congress” (12 USC 5202 Section 3[9]). 
50 In connection with Chrysler’s bankruptcy case certain of the company’s secured debtholders argued that an 
auto manufacturer could not be a “financial institution.” They were found by Judge Gonzalez to “lack standing 
to assert any argum ents about the authority for the Government’s loans, because they had no injury in fact 
traceable to the source of the funding” (GMC 2009c, 11-12; also see Gonzalez 2009a).  
339
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 43 ---
institutions are financial instruments the purchase of which is necessary to promote 
stability to the financial system of the United States, and, as such, are “troubled assets,” 
as that term is defined in Section 3(9)(b) of the Act, and eligible to be purchased under 
the TARP (Paulson 2008b). 
The determination was transmitted to the “appropriate committees of Congress” as 
required by the Act (see Dassin 2009, 17–32).  
On April 29, 2009, after the Obama  administration had taken office , then-Secretary 
Geithner also issued a determination that was substantially similar to the Paulson 
determination, except it referenced the AIFP and seemed to shift away slightly from the 
nexus with the auto financing companies:  
WHEREAS, certain companies engaged in the manufacturing of automotive vehicles 
have applied under the TARP AIFP requesting that the Department of the Treasury 
purchase debt obligations or equity of such holding  companies and other com panies 
consistent with the AIFP; 
WHEREAS, such holding companies and other companies are “ financial institutions” 
for purposes of section 3(5) of the Act as they are “institutions ” established and 
regulated under the laws of the United States and have sign ificant operations in the 
United States; and  
NOW, THEREFORE, I HEREBY DETERMINE that the debt obligations or equity of such 
financial institutions are financial instruments the purchase of which is necessary to 
promote financial market  stability, and as s uch, are “troubled assets,” as that term is 
defined in section 3(9)( B) of the Act, and eligible to be purchased under the TARP  
(Geithner 2009a). 
The Secretaries’ determinations were scrutinized administratively and in court. In several 
cases involving the assistance to Chrysler and GM , the judge determined that the objectors 
did not have standing to raise the issue or that the issue was moot  (COP 2009b, 76; Gerber 
2009, 83 -85). The rationale and determination of the ability to use TARP funds applies 
equally to the financing provided to the new Chrysler (COP 2009a, 131). 
4. What tools did the government have available?  
Following the companies’ initial requests to Congress for assistance in October 2008, 
Senate Banking Committee Chairman Chris Dodd sent a letter to the Federal Reserve 
requesting support to the industry. Although the  Fed had already used its emergency 
lending authority under F ederal Reserve Act Section 13(3) to assist a number of financial 
institutions (Bear Stearns, Fannie and Freddie Mac, and AIG),  Chairman Ben Bernanke 
wrote a response explaining that the Fed could not have lent to the companies under its 
Section 13(3) authority because they did not have adequate collateral.  
Initially, though the TARP had recently passed, it was unclear that its funds could be used 
to assist the manufacturers . However, the Bush administration determined that TARP  
340
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 44 ---
funds could be used to support the auto industry  by purchasing “troubled assets ” from the 
manufacturers, including debt securities of GM and Chr ysler’s holding company , making 
loans and injecting capital. TARP funding was used to fund the loans to GM and Chrysler  
and their related post -bankruptcy companies , the loans and equity purchases in Chrysler 
Financial and GMAC, the Auto Supplier Support  Program, and the Auto Warranty 
Commitment Program. 
Procedures under the  Bankruptcy Code were also available. The code provides a 
framework for protecting, valuing , and equitably distributing assets among all creditors  
according to an established priority. Equity owners are last in order of recovery and often 
do not receive any compensation for their holdings. Because of its automatic stay, barring 
almost all transfers of assets for a period leading up to the bankruptcy filing and during, 
subject to court approval, a bankruptcy  avoids a grab for assets (similar to a run) that can 
lead to inequities among stakeholders.  
Procedures under the Bankruptcy Code, notably Chapter 7 ( liquidation) and  Chapter 11 
(reorganization) were available  to GM and Chrysler . However, despite their worsening 
conditions, neither company had  begun to make plans for such a process . The Obama 
Treasury team believed it would be difficult to acquire DIP financing in the required 
amounts from the market  at the time . Therefore, the government recommended that both 
companies pursue reorganization through an expedited Section 363 sale process, with t he 
legacy companies liquidating under Chapter 7.  The government funding to support the 
proceedings was protected as DIP funding, which is given a super priority status under the 
code. 
Although the Federal Reserve declined to provide customized funding to G M and Chrysler, 
the auto manufacturers and their finance arms did access financial support under a number 
of the broad -based liquidity programs put in place by the Fed, such as the TALF ( COP 
2009b, 195) Additionally, the Fed’s Board of Governors also appro ved GMAC’s application 
to convert to a bank holding company on an expedited basis , which granted access to the 
Fed’s discount window  and allowed the company to receive funds under a TARP program 
intended for banks , while also subjecting it to heightened su pervision (Federal Reserve  
2008).  
5. What additional tools did the government seek to acquire?  
The Bush administration originally sought to have Congress pass legislation providing 
targeted assistance to the auto industry . However, several attempts failed at different 
stages, and as a result President Bush determined to use TARP funds for the industry.  
6. What was the government’s initial strategy?  
The Bush administration’s initial strategy was to provide conditional limited support to GM 
and Chrysler to forestall their failure until the Obama administration was sworn in and the 
new administration could determine what , if any, continued support it would provide.  In 
granting the Bridge Loans,  the Bush administration  borrowed a condition-based 
framework that had been included in a bill that the House had passed, but that had died. 
341
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 45 ---
The administration required the manufacturers to produce and submit viability plans 
outlining how they would achieve long -term stability (COP 2009 b, 9–10; Klier and 
Rubenstein 2012, 38 ). The Oba ma administration adopted this condition-based funding 
strategy. The incoming administration’s immediate priority was to determine as quickly as 
possible whether to continue to fund the companies’  plans for long-term viability or to 
withdraw assistance (COP 2009b, 10; Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 38.)  
7. How did the government implement its initial strategy?  
On December  19, 2008, the Treasury department  announced that it would provide 
collateralized Bridge Loans to GM and Chrysler . The loans were short  term (60 days) and 
required each company to , among other terms, submit a viability plan detailing how it 
planned to reach long -term viability, on what time frame , and identifying needed funding . 
Additional funds were conditioned on the acceptability of the plans. If deemed 
unsatisfactory, outstanding commitments could be rescinded and the Bridge Loans could 
be called. 51 Details of the requirements of the viability plans, including that the companies 
seek concession s from their creditors, debtholders,  and employee unions, were made 
public. See Nye 2022a for more detail regarding the terms of the Bridge Loans.  
8. How did the government decide on the specific terms of its initial interventions? 
Notably, assistance to the manufacturers was characterized by providing limited funds on a 
short-term basis with addi tional support conditioned on regular “check -ins” via the 
viability plans. This was characteristically different from the government’s approach to the 
government-sponsored enterprises  (GSEs). Although the GSEs  were taken into 
government-managed conservatorships , Treasury also made a blanket commitment to 
maintain their positive net worth .52 The Federal Reserve bridge loan to AIG not only 
seemed to anticipate no additional assistance, but it also could not be called on the basis of 
the steps AIG took to fix itself.53 The approach with the auto manufacturers seems to reflect 
reluctance an d uncertainty around the support, as well as a desire for heightened 
transparency. 
The original amounts of the auto Bridge Loans and the DIP financing were based on 
amounts requested by GM and Chrysler, respectively, and what the government 
determined was needed to sustain the companies.  The timing of the distribution of the 
Bridge Loan funds (one lump sum for Chrysler and t hree distributions for GM) seem to 
have been individually negotiated with the companies . Some funds committed to GM were 
 
51 Conditioning additional funding on the acceptability of viability plans was unus ual, not only because it was 
indicative of the Bush administration’s desire to not hamstring the incoming Obama administration with a 
completed decision, but also because it contrasted sharply with the terms of assistance provided to financial 
institutions. It does, however, demonstrate that such terms can be required in ad hoc support cases and may 
result in significant long-term impacts. Also see footnote 30. 
52 See Zanger-Tishler and Wiggins (2021) for a discussion of the government’s assistance to the GS Es. 
53 See Wiggins, Lawson, et al. (2021) for a detailed discussion of the government’s assistance to AIG.  
342
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 46 ---
delayed pending receipt of a satisfactory viability plan and conditioned on the r elease of 
the second half of the TARP funds.  
9. Did the government’s strategy change over time?  
While it can be debated whether the ultimate bankruptcies of GM and Chrysler sho uld be 
considered a change of strategy, we believe that the most accurate characterization may be 
that they instead constitute an implementation of the Bush and Obama administrations’ 
original strategy to support the companies until a long -term solution fo r their viability 
could be determined, or not.  However, we do characterize two developments as changes to 
the government’s strategy (1) utilization of the Section 363 expedited bankruptcy 
procedure, and (2) providing assistance to related industry entities.  
10. How did the government implement its amended strategy? 
To maximize the chance of success of the GM and Chrysler restructuring s, and avoid 
contamination of healthier manufacturers, the government instituted two amendments to 
its original strategy. The first was to use the expedited Section 363 bankruptcy procedure 
to restructure the companies quicker than a traditional Chapter 11 procedure could have.  
In this regard it should also be noted that , originally, any mention of bankruptcy was se en 
as an anathema because it was thought that customers would abandon the companies. 
Second, the government also implemented t hree tangential programs of assistance. It 
provided loans and other support to  GMAC54 and Chrysler Financial55 to maintain the 
critical financing for the manufacturers’ dealer networks and retail purchases (Goolsbee 
and Krueger 2015, 7–8). It created the ASSP56 to provide financial support to auto suppliers 
selected by the two manufacturers (COP 2009b, 22–23). Last, it provided warranty support 
to new customers who purchased vehicles from the two manufacturers57 (COP 2009b, 21–
22).  
11. How did the government determine the specifics of its amended interventions?  
The government decided to have the GM and Chrysler  pursue bankruptcy under Section 
363 rather than a more standard Chapter 11 process because it would enable the 
companies to discharge many of their liabilities and emerge from bankruptcy as viable 
companies with new balance sheets and plans. Sadiq Malik , a  member of the President’s 
Auto Task Force, commented that the Task Force thought the Section 363 process was the 
best way to restructure the business and the quickest way to do it considering the position 
the companies were in: 
 
54 For a detailed discussion of assistance to GMAC/Ally Financial, see Matsumoto and Nygaard (2022).  
55 For a detailed discussion of assistance to Chrysler Financial, see Nye (2022c). 
56 For a detailed discussion of the ASSP, see Matsumoto (2022).   
57 For a detailed discussion of the AWSP, see Henken (2022). 
343
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 47 ---
Given the type of issues that GM and Chrysler faced—these are very old companies that 
have been around forever. Over the years, they had all sorts of liabilities. They have a 
massive balance sheet, lots of leverage, lots of liabilities related to pensions, labor. [. . . ]  
We worked  with the management team and tried different ways of running their 
numbers, but their cashflow profile, their financial profile was such that their liquidity 
needs were massive.  There was so much in liabilities that if you just gave money, you 
could not b e sure if —or how —you would get your money back. Going through the 
bankruptcy allowed you to create more value and more ability to make your money 
back (Malik 2022, 5–7).  
A major second consideration was that Section 3 63 provides an expedited process that can 
be comple ted in a much shorter time frame than a traditional process. 58 Given the weak 
nature of the economy, the already significant layoffs and plant closings, and the risk of 
damage to related segments of the ind ustry, a process that reached a conclusion in a 
fraction of the time of a traditional Chapter 11 restructuring was highly valued, although 
contentious (COP 2009b, 46–48). There was also concern that the longer process would put 
the restructuring at risk as consumers would avoid the companies. 
The DIP funds were released in connection with each company ’s entering into a Section 
363 bankruptcy procedure. Consistent with standard DIP financing, the interest rate on the 
loans was a penalty rate and the governme nt’s claims were granted  super priority status. 
The loan terms were approved by the court.  The government also provided funds to the 
new companies as working capital. 
Another change to the government’s initial strategy  arose due to the highly integrated 
nature of the auto industry. It became apparent that a failure of either GM or Chrysler could 
lead to dysfunctions in other areas of the industry, for examples, suppliers, whose collapse 
could put healthier manufactures at risk. Similarly, failure of key suppliers could jeopardize 
the restructuring of the two manufacturers. The auto finance companies were also 
experiencing the effects of the credit crunch, making financing difficult for dealers and 
consumers. And it was recognized that customers would be reluctant to purchase a vehicle 
if they felt that the manufacturer would not stand behind the warranty. Thus, the 
government determined that these three related structures —auto finance,  suppliers, and 
customer warranties—needed to be supported as well.  
 
58 Notably, the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy involved a Section 363 sale. On September 20, 2008, Barcla ys 
PLC purchased the majority of assets of Lehman’s North American investment banking and capital markets 
business valued at $49.7 billion for $45 billion in what the court described as “the largest, most expedited and 
probably the most dramatic asset sale  that has ever occurred in bankruptcy history.” The sale was approved 
just 5 days after Lehman’s filing (Chadbourne & Parke LLP 2011). 
344
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 48 ---
12. How did the government protect the taxpayers?  
Treasury protected its interests in the GM and Chrysler Bridge Loans and working capital 
loans in a variety of ways: 
• The Bridge Loans were secured by liens on all of GM’s and Chrysler’s 
unencumbered ass ets, although many of their assets were already 
encumbered. 
• The Bridge Loans provide d the government with warrants to purchase GM 
common stock and both GM and Chrysler granted the government Additional 
Notes. Although the government did not directly benefi t from the warrants 
and Additional Notes, they were redeemed in connection with the 
restructurings, and it did benefit from the larger theory of the taxpayers’ 
sharing in the company’s recovery through the conversion of its loan debt into 
equity in the surviving compan ies. (See “Program Description : Assistance to 
General Motors” and “Program Description: Assistance to Chrysler” for further 
discussion of the warrants and Additional Notes.)  
• The Bridge Loan agreements contained provisions prohibiting the 
manufacturers from paying dividends, selling major assets, or conducting out-
of-the-ordinary transactions while the Bridge Loans were outstanding. 
• The government’s future funding was conditioned on the manufacturers ’ 
producing acceptable viability plans , which required that certain specific 
objectives be pursued and met. 
• The Bridge Loans contained provisions converting them to DIP financing if the 
manufacturer filed for bankruptcy protection. 
Treasury and EDC protected their interests in the GM and Chrysler DIP Loans and loans to 
the companies that survived the restructurings, New GM and New  Chrysler, in a variety of 
ways: 
• The DIP funding was supported by first-priority liens on substantially all of the 
companies’ assets. The Bankruptcy Code allowed the loans to bypass more 
senior creditors (with a few exceptions).  
• Treasury obtained a first-priority lien on all of the assets of New Chrysler with 
respect to its post-bankruptcy funding. 
• Treasury and EDC converted the GM Bridge Loans, working capital loans , and 
DIP loans into equity in New GM rather than weigh down the  company with 
excessive debt . Treasury’s controlling interest  created the opportunity for 
taxpayers to benefit from appreciation in the stock’s value. I t also permitted 
Treasury to have input into company management , including influencing the 
company’s IPO, which proved to be oversubscribed; Treasury eventually sold 
345
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 49 ---
its shares for  a cumulative return of $29.22 billion dollars ( COP 2009a , 54).  
Despite this result, the government’s ownership of a controlling interest in an 
industrial company, and timing of the sale, raised controversy. 59 
• Treasury and EDC received Additional Notes in connection with their DIP 
lending to GM and Chrysler (GMC 2009b, PDF pp. 9, 49). Although ultimately 
the notes were not repaid, they were intended as additional security as 
required by TARP. (See “Program Description: Assistance to General Motors ” 
and Program Description: Assistance to Chrysler.”)  
• In return for providing f inancing to New Chrysler, Treasury received a 9.8 5% 
equity stake in New Chrysler and additional power over the VEBA’s large stake 
in New Chrysler. (COP 2011 , 56 –57). While the receipt of equity anticipated 
that the Treasury and taxpayers might benefit from  appreciation in New 
Chrysler’s stock price post -bankruptcy, such benefit was limited when 
compared with the results at GM due to the size of the government’s interest 
and the decision to use equity as an incentive for Fiat to succeed at the merger 
and availability of funds.  
Fiat had rights to purchase Treasury’s shares and otherwise increase its ownership if it 
satisfied certain operational milestones. (However, Fiat could only acquire a controlling 
interest in New Chrysler after it repaid all TARP and Ca nadian government loans.)  In July 
2011, Fiat purchased Treasury’s shares for $500 million and paid an additional $60 million 
relating to rights that Treasury held with respect to the VEBA’s equity interests, which it 
did not have funding to acquire (Treasury 2011).  
13. How did the government administer the rescue? 
President Obama formed the Presidential Auto Task Force to oversee the assistance to the 
auto industry. The Cabinet -level Task Force, chaired by Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner 
and economic adviser Larry Summers , was assisted by a team of staff members at the 
Treasury and headed by two appointed co -chairs, Ron Bloom and Steve Rattner. The 
Treasury Auto Team reviewed the viability plans and reported to the Task Force and also 
engaged in negotiations with the auto manufacturers and other interested parties 
 
59 While owning equity interests created the opportunity for the taxpayers to share in the stock price 
appreciation as the  company rebounded, participating in the upside of recovery, an objective valued by 
Congress and built into TARP, there was no guarantee that such benefits would be realized. Although the 
government realized a profit from its ownership of GM, it also faced  criticism for controlling a private 
company, and its decision to unwind its position “as quickly as possible” came under scrutiny.  The situation 
highlights the tension between early disposition and retaining ownership longer to maximize returns, as 
pointed out in a 2011 Congressional Oversight Panel report: “This sale represents a major recovery of 
taxpayer funds, but it is important to note that Treasury received a price of $33.00 per share —well below the 
$44.59 needed to be on track to recover fully taxpayers’ money. Selling stock for less than this break -even 
price, Treasury essentially ‘locked in’ a loss of billions of dollars and thus greatly reduced the likelihood that 
taxpayers will ever be repaid in full” (COP 2011, 1–2).  
346
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 50 ---
(employees, unions, creditors, bondholders, and in the case of Chrysler, Fiat) to reach 
successful viability plans. 
14. How did the government coordinate its actions?  
The overwhelming ma jority of the government actions were conducted by the Auto Team 
and reported up to the Task Force, which reported to the President. 
Treasury coordinated with the Federal Reserve on the creation of the TALF and financially 
supported the program, which, amo ng other things would lend against securitized dealer 
and customer auto loans, a market that had largely evaporated at the time. 
There was also some coordination between Treasury and the governments of Canada and 
Ontario with respect to the DIP loans for G M and Chrysler, as discussed in  “Program 
Description: Canadian Participation in Assistance to Manufacturers.” 
15. How did the government communicate the terms of the intervention? 
The government took a more transparent approach to the auto assistance than it did for 
any other rescue of a major company during the crisis . Notably, while many of the largest 
rescue efforts prior to the autos (for example, AIG, the banking assistance under the Capital 
Assistance Program , and Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae) were preside d over by Fed 
Chairman Bernanke and Secretary Paulson, President Bush devoted a special public 
address on December 19, 2008 , to announcing the assistance to the auto industry and 
explaining the reasons behind such assistance and some of its structure to th e public ; he 
didn’t do that for Bear Stearns, the GSEs, or AIG. 
While much information was  disclosed about several of the other significant rescues (for 
example, AIG and the GSEs ) after actions were taken, a major difference with  the auto 
rescue was that  the entire game  plan was largely laid out to the public  as it unfolded 
through the process of requiring the viability plans. This course of action may have been 
influenced by the timing of the rescue , which occurred largely at the very beginning of the 
Obama administration, and by the fact that unlike the other rescues, various auto 
manufacturer stakeholders were expected to make significant concessions.  
Following significant decisions, both presidential administrations published fact sheets and 
timelines of the plans and steps taken ( see, for example , Treasury 2009e and Treasury 
2013a). Under the Bush administration, communications were issued by the White House, 
and later, under the Obama administration, by the President’s Auto Task Force , in both 
cases situating the rescue in the White House rather than in the Treasury as other TARP 
rescue effort s had been . The administrations published detailed descriptions of the 
conditions that attached to the assistance and of evaluations of the required viability plans 
made by the Auto Task Force.  
The terms of future funding required that specific accommodations be sought from 
creditors, employees, and unions and in some instances administration officials 
participated directly in negotiations with the auto manufacturers and such parties, a more 
347
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 51 ---
engaged posture than the government assumed with other major rescues ( COP 2009b, 85–
91). President Obama also held a number of press conferences to speak about the rescue. In 
one such conference  (and a related press release) , he criticized GM’s cred itors for not  
“doing their part ,” alluding to the manufacturer’s failed effort to get 70% of creditors to 
agree to concessions that would have permitted a pre -planned bankruptcy, also a n 
expedited process.  
16. What was the government’s exit strategy? 
The government’s initial exit strategy under President Bush was to prevent a disorderly 
collapse of the companies until the Obama administration could take over and to condition 
additional fund ing the requirement of an acceptable viability plan.  The Obama 
administration made clear in communication that it did not want to run the companies but 
only to stabilize them, avoid negative effects from their disorderly failure, protect t he 
taxpayers’ investment, and disengage from them as soon as the opportunity for a successful 
IPO presented itself. (To this end, Treasury received nonvoting common shares in New GM 
and New Chrysler after their Section 363 bankruptcies. “Treasury is guided by a number of 
different principles for its involvement in private companies and, as with GM, it needs to 
balance its desire to exit as soon as practicable against its objective of maximizing the value 
of the taxpayers’ investment” (COP 2011, 33). In testifying before the COP, Auto Task Force 
co-chair Steve Rattner, described the government’s goals as an investor as follows: 
• First, the Government has no desire to own equity in companies any longer 
than necessary, and it will seek to dispose of its o wnership interest as soon as 
practicable.  
• Second, the Government will protect the taxpayers’ investment by managing 
its ownership stake in a hands-off commercial manner. 
• And finally, as a common shareholder, the Government will only vote on core 
governance issues, including the selection of a company’s board of directors 
and major corporate events or transactions (COP 2009a, 15). 
On November 18, 2010 , 16 months after emerging from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, New GM 
launched an IPO and sold shares worth $23.1 billion, making it the largest IPO in US history 
at the time . The IPO was widely considered a success , garnering a larger -than-expected 
share price and subscriptions. Treasury sold a significant portion of its stake in New GM 
and was able to sell even more s hares than they had initially anticipated ( Klier and 
Rubenstein 2012 , 42). Through additional sales , the government steadily reduced its 
holdings in New GM through December 2013 , resulting in a cumulative return of $29.22 
billion dollars. 
The government began with a much smaller equity interest in New Chrysler (9.85%), and 
this investment was quickly diluted by Fiat’s exercise of certain agreements among the 
parties. In July 2011, Fiat purchased Treasury equity shares for a predetermined $500 
million. Thus, although both deals granted the Treasury equity shares, the grants were very 
348
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 52 ---
different in nature, and the government did not have a significant opportunity to b enefit 
from Chrysler’s post -bankruptcy recovery, much of the benefit of which went to Fiat, who 
was guiding the company and which by 2011 was the controlling shareholder.  
17. Were there unique factors that influenced the government’s actions? 
(a) The government’s use of TARP funds for the auto industry was controversial. 
At the time of the auto manufacturers’ initial requests for funding in October 2008, it was 
unclear whether T ARP funds could be used to assist the auto industry and the Bush 
administration originally declined to provide such assistance. However , after Congress 
failed to provide t argeted funding for the auto manufacturers, the Bush administration 
reconsidered its initial position regarding the availability of TARP funds and in consultation 
with Secretary Paulson and counsel decided that such funds could be used to assist the 
industry. This decision was controversial from the start  and the “subject of considerable 
debate” (COP 20 09b, 4 ). The administration even stated publicly that  “The President's 
preference was not to use TARP funds to assist these firms, but since Congress failed to act, 
executive branch action is necessary” (White House 2008). 
Mara McNeill, who was Treasury senior counsel in the Ob ama administration, recalls that 
counsel advised Secretary Geithner regarding “some of the risks in terms of people who 
could later object that we weren’t within proper authority.  [We engaged in]  a lot of triage 
regarding what we could do with the loans, what an exception would look like, what were 
the risks around the new administration making new advances” (McNeill 2022, 2).  
The government provided public statements, testimony to Congress, and argued in several 
court cases that its interpretation permitting the use of TARP funds was correct. (See COP 
2009b, 71–78; Dassin 2009 ; and  discussion at Key Design Decision No. 3 .) In some court 
cases, the issue was deterred to be moot and left undecided . However, in considering the 
issue, the court presiding over the GM bankruptcy agreed, finding that: 
The US Treasury’s extension of credit to, and resulting security interest in, [GM], as set 
forth in the DIP Facility and the Existing UST Loan Agreement and as authorized in the 
interim and final orders approving the DIP Facility, is a valid use of funds pursuant to 
EESA (emphasis added). 
The rationale and determination of the ability to use TARP funds applies equally to the 
financing provided to the new Chrysler (COP 2009a, 131). 
Notwithstanding this one court ruling , the COP’s 2009 analysis of this point remarks that, 
“There was, however, enough ambiguity in the TARP legislation, and the re continues to be 
ambiguity about congressional intent, so that Treasury has faced no effective challenge to 
its decision to use TARP funds for this purpose” (COP 2009b, 4).  
349
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 53 ---
Two years later, in 2011, the COP commented that, “The use of TARP resources to prevent 
the collapse of two of the three domestic  automakers was and continues to be 
controversial” (COP 2011, 8). Ultimately, however, the Panel concluded that:60 
At the end of this analysis, the question that remains is whether the executive  should 
get the benefit of the doubt about a close question of statutory interpretation when the 
executive might have thought in good faith that interpreting the statute in a particular 
way [sic] was crucial to the national interest. This question may neve r be answered 
with any finality as the Panel is not aware of any court before which the issue is 
currently pending and therefore it may never be resolved (COP 2009b, 79). 
Thus, although controversial, the government’s interpretation and use of TARP funds f or 
the auto industry stood amidst what appears to have been more of a squall of controversy 
than a tsunami. This may indicate that in the middle of a crisis, the government’s exercise 
of its discretion will be extended the benefit of the doubt even though such exercise may 
be, or may appear to be, stretching its authority. 
(b) The fact that there were multiple companies seeking funding provided opportunities 
for the government to be strategic.  
The fact that GM and Chrysler were both seeking funding from the government provided 
opportunities for the government to be strategic in its response.  It did this through 
individualized evaluations of the viability plans, requiring stakeholder concessions, and by 
crafting company-specific responses. Publishing the conditions of the funding and the 
evaluations of the viability plans added to the government’s credibility and also likely 
influenced stakeholders, especially when it suggested that it was willing to let Chrysler fail. 
The strategic timing and use of tools , such as the possibility of allowing Chrysler to fail, 
reintroducing the idea of bankruptcy , and then having Chrysler go through bankruptcy 
before the larger GM, may have improved the overall success of the project. 
(c) The government required stricter funding conditions and was more engaged than in 
the rescues of financial institutions. 
The government took a more strict, engaged, and transparent approach to the auto 
assistance than it did for other rescues of major companies during the crisis. It required 
that GM and Chrysler seek specific accommodations from creditors, employees, unions, and 
bondholders as conditions to funding and in some instances participated directly  in 
negotiations with a more engaged posture than it had assumed with other major rescues 
(Klier and Rubenstein 2012 , 38–40). The Congressional Oversight Panel commented in its 
2009 report that,  
 
60 It also cited earlier situations that provide a basis for deferring to the executive’s interpretation (see COP 
2009b, 71–78). 
350
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 54 ---
Treasury’s financial assistance to the automotive industry d iffered significantly from 
its assistance to the banking industry. Assistance given to the banks has carried less 
stringent conditions, and money was made readily available without a review of 
business plans or without any demands that shareholders forfeit  their stake in the 
company or top management forfeit their jobs. By contrast, Treasury was a tough 
negotiator as it invested taxpayer funds in the automotive industry. The bulk of the 
funds were available only after the companies had filed for bankruptcy,  wiping out 
their old shareholders, cutting their labor costs, reducing their debt obligations , and 
replacing some top management (COP 2009b, 3). 
Both President Bush and President  Obama personally assumed a highly visible leadership 
role in the auto rescue  through presidential speeches , including several on the part of 
Obama. Obama established the Presidential Auto Task Force, rather than having the 
Treasury run the rescue. By contrast, during the previous year , the Bush administration 
allowed Fed Chairman Bernanke and Secretary Paulson be the main spokespersons for the 
government’s actions combatting the crisis. 
Another difference is that government officials directly engaged with the auto 
manufacturers and stakeholders (for example, creditors  and unions) to negotiate the 
concessions they sought. The C OP commented in its 2009 report that , “ Others wish the 
government had been equally tough in negotiating the investment of TARP funds in banks” 
(COP 2009b, 111 ). The panel also acknowledged that th ere had been rumors about 
government officials using aggressive tactics with pre -petition creditors to negotiate 
concessions and structure the Section 363 sale. In light thereof, it noted that this posture 
raised some concerns from stakeholders , given the government’s overweight position in 
any negotiation. 61 
The government’s transparency also differed with the auto rescue. It published detailed 
descriptions of the preconditions that it attached to the assistance and of its evaluations of 
the required viability plans creating a public blow-by-blow record of the process (Klier and 
Rubenstein 2012, 38-40).  
The government’s course of action with respect to the auto rescue may have been 
influenced by (1) the belief that one or more of the companies was insolve nt at the time, 
whereas the solvency of the financial companies assisted was debatable ; (2) the timing of 
the rescue, which occurred largely at the very beginning of the Obama administration’s 
tenure, providing the new administration an opportunity to “take  charge” of a major crisis 
issue; (3) the fact that the industry’s problems were perceived more as an economic issue 
 
61 This type of pushing helped achieve the terms and concessions that the government thought necessary for a 
successful restructuring. However, care should be taken in such negotiations. Given the overweight authority 
of the government, any pressure to concede may be viewed as coercive pressure, which can lead to claims of 
favoritism and which could be publicly embarrassing. See, for example, COP 2009b, 92 –102, for a discussion 
in “Government Involvement in Bankruptcy Proceedings.” 
351
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 55 ---
than as one of systemic financial instability ; and ( 4) the fact that compared to the 
intricacies and complications of financial companies and sophisticated instruments like 
collateralized debt obligations, the issues presented by the auto industry were 
straightforward, easily understood, and populist in nature.  
(d) The size of the manufacturers and the criticality of the auto industry  to employment 
and the economy were major factors. 
After Congress failed to provide targeted funding  for the auto manufacturers, the Bush 
administration reconsidered its initial position regarding the availability of TARP funds and 
decided that such funds could be used to assist t he industry. In doing so, the government 
stated that this decision was heavily influenced by the  size of the manufacturers, their 
position within the auto industry, and how significant the effects of a disorderly failure of 
either company would be  on the already weaken ed economy , including the possible 
significant loss of jobs  (White House 2008 ). Despite these factors, there was credible 
discussion of letting Chrysler fail if it could not secure a partner  (Goolsbee and  Krueger 
2015, 2, 11–15).  
(e) The i nterconnectedness and interdependence of the auto industry  had to be 
addressed. 
Because the auto industry is a highly integrated industry , the failure of either GM or 
Chrysler risked contaminating the vast network of auto suppliers that supported not only 
these two manufacturers but also healthier manufacturers. To avoid this , the government 
created the Auto Supplier Assistance Program, which enabled each manufacturer to select 
certain key suppliers to participate in government-supported funding.  
Issues of interconnection also accounted for the participation of the governments of 
Canada and Ontario in funding GM and Chrysler prior to bankruptcy and the subsequent 
DIP loans.  
(f) The high-cost and long -term nature of vehicles as products required addressing the 
financing issues. 
Vehicles are high-cost, long-term assets that almost always are financed by the consumer. 
In the case of both GM and Chrysler, a significant portion of consumer refinancing was done 
through preferential arrangements with GMAC and Chrysler Financial, respectively. These 
companies also provided significant portions of  the manufacturers’ dealer floor plan  
financing, which brough t the inven tory to the showrooms. The near freeze of credit 
markets and ABS securitization in autumn 2008 had significantly crippled these  funding 
sources, creating a substantial roadblock to the manufacturers’ chances of recovery. Thus, 
the government provided funding to GMAC and Chrysler Financial to maintain their ability 
to support GM and Chrysler through funding as they rehabilitated ( COP 2009 b, 75). The 
Treasury also worked with the Federal Reserve to enhance the TALF to securitize vehicle 
loans and provide funding and additional assistance to the finance companies to restart 
these funding channels   
352
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 56 ---
In a similar vein, because of the reluctance of consumers to purchase vehicles if they feel 
there is a risk that the manufacturer will not stand behind the product, the government 
also provided support for warranties on new vehicles purchased from Chrysler an d GM 
(COP 2009b, 21–22).  
IV. Evaluation and Conclusions 
When asked by the COP how the government would measure the success of the TARP -
funded rescue , Ron Bloom, Treasury s enior adviser on auto issues, gave the following 
answer: 
I think success will be measured in the way that one as a taxpayer would expect it to be 
measured, and tha t is to say the taxpayers put a lot of money up and they want their 
money back. So, the greater percentage of the money that we invested that we get back, 
the greater success. That is clearly the primary measure (Bloom 2009b, 38). 
Based on this metric, the  rescues of GM and Chrysler were not totally successful.  The 
government reported recover ing $39.7 billion with respect to its investment in GM.   
(Treasury n.d.a). It also reported a $1.3 billion loss with respect to assistance to Chrysler, 
and a $2.4 billon gain with respect to GMAC/Ally62 (Treasury n.d.a). Amounts loaned under 
the ASSP program were also fully  repaid and the funds under the  AWCP were never 
accessed.  
However, the net gain or loss is not the only useful measure of the outcom e of the 
government’s efforts. Facing the prospect of the companies’ failures and the possible loss of 
up to 1 million jobs and significant knock-on effects to the economy, the  Bridge Loans 
sustained the companies through their most critical period and a presidential transition and 
later assistance helped them structure concrete plans for lon g-term vi ability. By some 
measures, the rescue has been more successful than almost anyone predicted at the time.  
Goolsbee and Krueger, two architects of the rescue have commented that: “In particular, we 
had reservations about the long -run viability of the Chrysler -Fiat merger ” (Goolsbee and 
Krueger 2015, 22). However, both New GM and New Chrysler returned profits in 2010 , the 
year of their restructuring.  
Another indicator of how investors perceived the success of the restructurings is that the 
GM IPO, in which the government sold its first significant stake in the company , was 
completed above the initial target  price, perm itting th e government to sell more shares 
than it had initially anticipated (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 42). It may also be argued that 
 
62 The final sale of Treasury’s equity in GMAC was comple ted in an IPO on December 19, 2014. Treasury 
ultimately recovered $19.6 billion on its investments in GMAC, a taxpayer profit of $2.4 billion (Treasury 
2014a). 
 
353
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 57 ---
if the government had held onto its shares longer, it might have been able to recover even 
more for the taxpayers (COP 2011, 4) . However, the timing of its sales was also influenced 
by its stated desire to exit from being a major shareholder of a large public company sooner 
rather than later (COP 2011, 4).  
And, as early as 2 011, a COP report noted that the industry was “reporting s trong sales” 
(COP 2011, 18): 
The industry’s financial outlook has improved considerably over the past two years. 
Despite a historically weak backdrop of US sales, the industry is now reporting strong 
profits. The combination of greatly reduced capacity,  generally stable market share, 
and improved pricing has more than offset persistently weak (but  improving) demand. 
Thus, many industry observers believe that an improvement in the economy will result 
in a disproportionate increase in profitability, as the industry will be able to  increase 
production without incurring meaningful new investment costs. 
The White House considered the restructuring a success . A year  after the bankruptcy 
filings, the administration stated: 
While this process  of regaining long -term financia l health will require much work, 
innovation, and perseverance,  there is no doubt that over the course of  the past year 
they have moved back from the brink to  a position of contributing to the economic 
recovery of the nation and auto communities (White House 2010, 16).63 
It is also worth noting, however, that Goolsbee and Krueger also expressed a restrained 
view of the bankruptcy proceedings as a tool stating that it was an especially clunky tool for 
addressing problems that implicate “cross -industry spillovers or broader government or 
social costs” (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 11-12). While they note that Chrysler 
outperformed expectations after its restructuring, they also suggest that “to some extent, 
Chrysler’s gains [in market share] came at the expense of the other domestic firms” like GM 
(Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 16). Yet, they conclude that, “the auto industry’s outsized 
contribution to the economic recovery has been one of the unexpected consequences of the 
government intervention.” (Goolsbee and Krueger 2015, 22).  
Klier and Rubenstein evaluated the rescues this way : “ It is hard to say how much of the  
current recovery is attributable to the government intervention, but we can say that the  
ensuing restruc turing of the Detroit carmakers has substantially changed the US auto 
industry, perhaps permanently ” (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 48). However, Bosco and 
Plante (2013) pointed out that despite the benefits, the GM bankruptcy also delivered 
 
63 President Obama also cited the auto rescue as one of the successes of his manufacturing polices in his 2012 
State of the Union address (Klier and Rubenstein 2012, 43). That same year, in a speech before the National 
Automobile Dealers Association, Preside nt Bush also affirmed the decision to assist the industry (Klier and 
Rubenstein 2012, 43). 
 
354
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 58 ---
negative effects on stockholders  and some creditors  including owners of GM vehicles 
whose claims were not absorbed by New GM.  
Regarding the government’s overall effort, the C OP concluded in a 2011 report that the 
rescue had succeeded : “The industry’s improved effi ciency has allowed automakers to 
become more flexible and better able to meet changing consumer demands, while still 
remaining profitable” (COP 2011, 15). Nevertheless, in addition to unique factors discussed 
in Key Design Decision  No. 17, the COP also identified a few areas of concern with the 
government’s intervention that are worth noting: 
(a) The panel discussed p otential conflicts in the government’s role as majority 
shareholder of a publicly held company including the possib ility of using such 
interest to pursue public  policy goals  and the risk of political interference in 
government-owned entities . The panel suggested that holding the shares in an 
independent trust similar to the government’s arrangement with the AIG equity 
interest might alleviate so me of these concerns  and also pointed to differentiating 
factors that might lessen the need for a trust (COP 2009b, 5).  
(b) The panel raised concerns regarding appropriate stewardship and transparency 
regarding the government’s investment s in New GM and New Chrysler, private 
companies, given the possible multi -year period until they might be liquidated. 
(This concern was rendered moot by the relatively quick sale of the New Chrysler 
shares to Fiat and the success of the GM IPO). It also ques tioned the timeliness of 
the government’s exit from  such investments, which, in effect, locked in losses and 
guaranteed that all taxpayer funds might not be recovered. In the alternative, the 
panel pointed favorably to the fact that the companies would be voluntarily filing 
periodic reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission that would be made 
public as being a helpful factor with respect to transparency (COP 2009b, 113). 
(c) The panel raised concerns that by assisting the auto manufacturers, and especially 
in absorbing some losses, the government may have created moral hazard and 
extended the concept of “too  big to fail” beyond financial institutions  to a much 
broader class of entity (COP 2011, 3). 
(d) The panel also suggested improvements to the governance of the bailout process, 
such as improved transparency of both Treasury and company management, 
establishment of clear goals and benchmarks to facilitate evaluation of progress, 
and a better balance between Treasury’s dual roles as shareholder and government 
policymaker (COP 2009b, 104–105). 
355
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 59 ---
V. References  
Ally Financial Inc. 2010. “Ally Financial Statement on New Corporate Brand.” Press release , 
May 10, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ally-financial-statement-new-corporate-brand 
———. 2010. Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31, 2010. Detroit, Michigan: 
Ally Financial Inc., May 2010.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ally-financial-inc-q1-2010-form-10-q  
———. 2011. Form 10-K (For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2010). Detroit, Michigan: 
Ally Financial Inc., February 25, 2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ally-financial-inc-form-10-k-annual-report-pursuant-  
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA). 2009. Public Law 111–5, 123 
Stat. 115. February 17, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/public-law-111-5-american-recovery-and-
reinvestment-act-2009 
Auto Industry Financing and Restructuring Act (AIFRA). 2008. H.R. 7321, 110th United 
States Congress, 2nd Session (2008). 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/hr-7321-110th-congress-auto-industry-
financing-and-restructuring-act 
Beeby, Dean. 2018. “Federal government quietly writes off loan —but won't reveal sum or 
say who got it.” CBC News. June 26, 2018.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/federal-government-quietly-writes-loan-
wont-reveal-sum-or-say-who-got-it  
Bloom, Ron. 2009a. “Ron Bloom, Senior Advisor at the U.S. Treasury Department, Written 
Testimony before the House Judiciary Committee, Commercial and Administrative Law 
Subcommittee: ‘Ramifications of Auto Industry Bankruptcies, Part II.’” July 21, 2009. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ron-bloom-senior-advisor-us-treasury-department-
written-testimony-house-judiciary 
———. 2009b. “Statement by Ron Bloom, Senior Advisor at the Treasury Department 
Before the Congressional Oversight Panel regarding Treasury’s Automotive Industry 
Financing Program (AIFP) July 27, 2009.” Contained in Congressional Oversight Panel , 
“Oversight of TARP Assistance to the Automobile Industry-Field Hearing—July 27, 2009.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ron-bloom-senior-advisor-us-treasury-department-
statement-congressional-oversight-panel 
———. 2022. “YPFS Lessons Learned Interview with Ron Bloom.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ypfs-lesson-learned-oral-history-project-interview-
ronald-bloom 
356
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 60 ---
Bosco, Christopher, and Catherine Plante. 2013. “Bankruptcy of General Motors.” GSTF 
Journal on Business Review (GBR) 2, no. 2. March 2013.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bankruptcy-general-motors 
Bureau of Economic Analysis  (BEA). n.d. Motor Vehicle Retail Sales: Domestic Autos 
[DAUTOSA]. Retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Retrieved October 1, 
2020.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/motor-vehicle-retail-sales-domestic-autos-dautosa  
Canada Development Investment Corporation (CDEV). 2016. Annual Report 2015. March 
10, 2016.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/canada-development-investment-
corporation-annual-report-2015 
Canada, Government of. N.d.  “Automotive Innovation Fund (Archived Programs ).” 
Webpage.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/program-summary-automotive-innovation-
fund 
———. 2009. “Ministers Clement and Day Announce New Measures to Help Boost 
Consumer Confidence in Auto Industry.” April 7, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ministers-clement-and-day-announce-new-measures-
help-boost-consumer-confidence-auto  
Canis, Bill , and Yacobucci Brent D. 2015. “The Advanced Technology Vehicles 
Manufacturing (ATVM) Loan Program: Status and Issues.” Congre ssional Research Service. 
January 15, 2015.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/advanced-technology-vehicles-manufacturing-atvm-
loan-program-status-and-issues 
Chadbourne & Parke LLP. 2011. “Court refuses to modify $45 billion sale of Lehman assets 
to Barclays.” Lexicology April 12, 2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/court-refuses-modify-45-billion-sale-
lehman-assets-barclays 
Chrysler Holding LLC. 2008. Loan and Security Agreement by and Between the Borrower 
Listed on Appendix A as Borrower an d the United States Department of the Treasury as 
Lender.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/document/loan-and-security-agreement-
between-chrysler-and-us-department-treasury 
———. 2011. Amendment No. 3 to Form 10.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/chrysler-group-llcs-amendment-no-3-form-10-general-
form-registration-securities-pursuant 
Congressional Oversight Panel. 2009a. “Oversight of TARP Assistance to the Automobile 
Industry-Field Hearing.” July 27, 2009.   
357
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 61 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/oversight-tarp-assistance-automobile-industry-field-
hearing-congressional-oversight-panel  
———. 2009b. “September Oversight Report: The Use of Tarp Funds in the Support and 
Reorganization of the Domestic Automotive Industry.” September 9, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/september-oversight-report-use-tarp-funds-support-
and-reorganization-domestic-automotive  
———. 2010. “March Oversight Report : The Unique Treatment of GMAC under TARP.”  
March 10, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/congressional-oversight-panel-march-oversight-report-
unique-treatment-gmac-under-tarp  
———. 2011. “January Oversight Report: An Update on TARP Support for the Domestic 
Automotive Industry.” January 13, 2011.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/congressional-oversight-panel-january-oversight-
report-update-tarp-support-domestic  
David, Fred N. 2010. “Interpreting the Supreme Court's Treatment o f the Chrysler 
Bankruptcy and Its Impact on Future Business Reorganizations.” Emory Bankruptcy 
Developments Journal 27, no. 1, 25–27.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/interpreting-supreme-courts-treatment-chrysler-
bankruptcy-and-its-impact-future-business  
Dassin, Lev L. Statement of the United States of America Upon the Commencement of 
General Motors Corporation’s Chapter 11 Case (December 19, 2008). In re General Motors 
Corp., S.D.N.Y. (December 19, 2009)  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/general-motors-chapter-11-bankruptcy-
statement  
de la Merced, Michael J. 2012. “Ally’s Mortgage Unit, ResCap, Files for Bankruptcy.” New 
York Times, DealBook, May 14, 2012.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/allys-mortgage-unit-rescap-files-bankruptcy 
Deese, Brian, Steven M. Shafran, and Dan Jester. 2020. “Chapter 13 : The Rescue and 
Restructuring of General Motors and Chrysler .” First Responders: Inside the U .S. Strategy for 
Fighting the 2007 –2009 Global Financial Crisis , edited by Ben S. Bernanke, Timothy F. 
Geithner and Henry M. Paulson, Jr., with J. Nellie Liang. New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2020, 359–384.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/first-responders-inside-us-strategy-fighting-
2007-2009-global-financial-crisis  
Dodd, Chris topher. 2008. Letter from Christopher J. Dodd, Chairman of the US Senate 
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, to Ben Bernanke , Chairman of the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. December 8, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/chris-dodd-letter-ben-bernanke 
358
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 62 ---
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA). Public Law 110-343. 122 Stat. 3765. 
October 3, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3365 
Engelhardt, Tom. “As GM Goes, So Goes…” The Nation (TomDispatch). February 23, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gm-goes-so-goes 
Federal Reserve, Board of Governors of the. 2008. “GMAC LLC [and] IB Finance Holding 
Company, LLC (Detroit, Michigan): Order Approving Formation of Bank Holding Companies 
and Notice to Engage in Certain Nonbanking Activities” (Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary) 
December 24, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-llc-ib-finance-holding-company-llc-detroit-
michigan-order-approving-formation-bank  
———. 2009. “Federal Reserve System Monthly Report on Credit and Liquidity Programs 
and the Balance Sheet.” June 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3247 
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC). 2010. “The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: 
Final Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis 
in the United States. “Washington, DC.: United States Printing Office, January 2011.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3366 
Friedman, Joshua L. 2012. “Emergency Powers of the Executive: The President’s Authority 
when all Hell Breaks Loose.” Journal of Law and Health 25, no. 265.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/emergency-powers-executive-presidents-
authority-when-all-hell-breaks-loose 
Geithner, Timothy F. 2009 a. Statement from Treasury Secretary Geithner on GM, Chrysler 
Restructuring Reports. February 17, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/statement-treasury-secretary-geithner-gm-chrysler-
restructuring-reports  
———. 2009 b. “Official Determination by Secretary Geithner on April 29, 2009 .” United 
States Department of the Treasury. April 29, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/determination  
General Motors Company (GM). 2010. “Amendment No.9 to Form S-1.” November 17, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/general-motors-company-amendment-no9-
form-s-1  
———. 2011. “GM Announc es First Full -Year Results as New Company.” February 24, 
2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gm-announces-first-full-year-results-new-company  
General Motors Corporation (GMC). 2009 a. Voluntary Petition:  United States Bankruptcy 
Court Southern District of New York. June 01, 2009.  
359
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 63 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/gmc-voluntary-petition-united-states-
bankruptcy-court-southern-district-new-york 
———. 2009b. “General Motors Corporation Debtor -in-Possession (DIP) Loan Contract.” 
June 3, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/node/4074 
———. 2009c. The Guarantors and the US Department of the Treasury, Secured Credit 
Agreement Among. 2009. July 10, 2009.  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4084 
General Motors Corporation (GMC) and the  US Department of the Treasury (Treasury). 
2008. “Loan and Security  Agreement by and Between the Borrower Listed on Appendix A 
as Borrower and the United States Department of the Treasury as Lender. ” December 31, 
2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/loan-and-security-agreement-and-between-
general-motors-corporation-borrower-and  
———. 2009. “Master Transaction Agreement between GMAC and Chrysler.” May 21, 2009. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/master-transaction-agreement-dated-may-21-2009-
between-united-states-department-treasury  
Gerber, Robert E. 2009. “Decision on Debtors’ Motion for Approval of (1) Sale of Assets to 
Vehicle Acquisition Holdings LLC; (2) Ass umption and Assignment of Related Executory 
Contracts; and (3) Entry into UAW Retiree Settlement Agreement.” Epiq Bankruptcy 
Solutions LLC.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/decision-debtors-general-motors-motion-approval-1-
sale-assets-vehicle-acquisition-holdings 
GMAC LLC. 2008a. Form 10 -Q for the quarterly period ended September 30, 2008. 
November 10, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-llc-q3-2008-form-10-q 
———. 2008b. “GMAC Files Application with Federal Reserve to Become Bank Holding 
Company.” Press release, November 20, 2008.  https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-
files-application-federal-reserve-become-bank-holding-company 
———. 2008c. “GMAC Announces That the Results of Its Exchange Offers Are Insufficient to 
Meet Regulatory Capital Requirements to Become a Bank Holding Company.” Press release, 
December 16, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-receives-significant-participation-and-extends-
early-delivery-time-its-notes-exchange 
———. 2008e. “GMAC Financial Services Bank Holding Company Application Approved by 
Federal Reserve.” Press release, December 24, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-financial-services-bank-holding-company-
application-approved-federal-reserve 
360
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 64 ---
———. 2009. Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2008. February 27, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-llc-form-10-k-annual-report-pursuant-section-13-
or-15d-securities-exchange-act-1934 
———. 2010a. “GMAC Financial Services Reports Preliminary First Quarter 2010 Financial 
Results.” Press release. May 3, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-financial-services-reports-preliminary-first-
quarter-2010-financial-results 
———. 2010b. Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31, 2010. May 7, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-form-10-q-quarterly-report-pursuant-section-13-
or-15d-securities-exchange-act-1934 
Gonzalez, Arthur J. 2009a. “Opinion and Order Regarding Emerg ency Economic 
Stabilization Act of 2008 and Troubled Asset Relief Program .” In Re. Chrysler LLC. et al. 
Debtors. US Bankruptcy Court, S.D,N.Y. May 31, 2009. 405 B.R. at 79.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/opinion-and-order-signed-5312009-regarding-
emergency-economic-stabilization-act-2008-and 
———. 2009b. “Opinion Granting Debtors’ Motion Seeking Authority to Sell, Pursuant to 11 
U.S.C. § 363, Substantially All of the Debtor s’ Assets.” In Re. Chrysler LC. Et al. Debtors. US 
Bankruptcy Court, S.D.N.Y. May 31, 2009. 405 B.R. at 84.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/opinion-granting-debtors-motion-seeking-
authority-sell-pursuant-11-usc-ss-363  
Goolsbee, Austan , and Alan B. Krueger. 2015. “A Retrospective Look at Rescuing and 
Restructuring General Motors and Chrysler.” Journal of Economic Perspectives . March 9, 
2015.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/retrospective-look-rescuing-and-
restructuring-general-motors-and-chrysler-0 
Government Accountability Office , United States (GAO). 2009a. “Troubled Asset Relief 
Program: Status of Efforts to Address Transparency and Accountability Issues.”  
January 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/troubled-asset-relief-program-status-efforts-address-
transparency-and-accountability-issues.  
———. 2009b. “Auto Industry: Summary of Government Efforts and Automakers’ 
Restructuring to Date.” April 23, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/united-states-government-accountability-office-report-
congressional-committees-auto  
Henken, Benjamin. 202 2. “The Resc ue of the US Auto Industry: Module G: The Auto 
Warranty Commitment Program.” Journal of Financial Crises 4: no. 1.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/8/ 
361
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 65 ---
Hirsch, Jerry. “GM’s profit in 2010 highlights big turnaround. ” Los Angeles Times , February 
25, 2011.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gms-profit-2010-highlights-big-turnaround  
History.com. 2018. “Automobile History.” August 21, 2018.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/automobile-history. 
 ———. 2020a. “Henry Ford.” March 20, 2020.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/henry-ford  
———. 2020b. “William Durant creates General Motors.” September 15, 2020.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/william-durant-creates-general-motors  
Iacocca, Lee. “Chrysler.” Encyclopedia Britannica, January 22, 2014.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/chrysler  
Indiana State Police Pension Trust et al. v. Chrysl er LLC et al. 2009a. 129 S.Ct. 2275 (Per 
Curiam Decision). Filed June 9, 2009. Supreme Court of the United States.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/ind-state-police-pension-trust-v-chrysler-llc-
556-us-960-129-s-ct-2275-173-l-ed-2d-1285 
———. 2009b. “In Re Chrysler LLC, et. al. Debtor vs. Indiana State Police Pension Trust, et 
al. Objectors-Appellants.” No. 09-2311-bk (2d Cir. Jun. 5, 2009).  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/re-chrysler-llc-et-al-debtor-vs-indiana-state-
police-pension-trust-et-al-objectors  
Keegan, Michael J. 2009. Declaration. In re: Chrysler LLC et. a., Debtors. (May 5, 2009).  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/declaration-re-chrysler-llc-et-al-debtor-vs-
indiana-state-police-pension-trust-et  
Kiely, Eugene. “Ford Motor Co. Does U -turn on Bailouts .” FactCheck.org. September 20, 
2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/ford-motor-co-does-u-turn-bailouts  
Klier, Thomas, and James M. Rubenstein. 2012. “Detroit back from the brink? Auto industry 
crisis and restructuring, 2008-11.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Economic Perspectives. 
2Q/2012.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/detroit-back-brink-auto-industry-crisis-and-
restructuring-2008-11 
Lubben, Stephen J. “No Big Deal: The GM and Chrysler Cases in Context. ” American 
Bankruptcy Law Journal  83, 2009 . Seton Hall Public Law Resea rch Paper No. 1467862.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/no-big-deal-gm-and-chrysler-cases-context 
Macrotrends. n.d. “General Motors Net Income 2009-2021.” Accessed May 26, 2021.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/general-motors-net-income-2009-2021 
362
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 66 ---
Malik, Sadiq. 2022. “YPFS Lessons Learned Interview with Sadiq Malik.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ypfs-lesson-learned-oral-history-project-interview-
malik-sadiq 
Matsumoto, Riki. 2022. “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry: Module F: Auto Supplier 
Support Program.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 1.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/7/ 
Matsumoto, Riki, and Kaleb B. Nygaard. 2022. “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry: Module 
D: Emergency Assistance to Ally Financial (formerly GMAC).” Journal of Financial Crises 4, 
no. 1.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/5/ 
McAlinden, Sean, Kristin Dziczek, and Debra Maranger Menk . 2008. “CAR Research 
Memorandum: The Impact on the US Economy of a Major Contraction of the Detroit Three 
Automakers.” Center for Automotive Research (CAR). November 4, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/car-research-memorandum-impact-us-economy-major-
contraction-detroit-three-automakers 
McNeill, Mara . 2022. “YPFS Lessons Learned Interview with Mara McNei ll.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ypfs-lesson-learned-oral-history-project-interview-
mara-mcneill 
National Public Radio. 2008. “ Examining Chrysler ’s 1979 Rescu e.” November 12, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/examining-chryslers-1979-rescue 
Neyland, Jordan B., and Kathryn A. St. John. 202 2. “Hidden Wealth Transfers in Bankruptcy 
Asset Sales: A Real Option Analysis .” Berkeley Business Law Journal  19, no. 1, 2022 
(February 2021; revised March 23, 2021).  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/hidden-wealth-transfers-bankruptcy-asset-
sales-real-option-analysis 
Nye, Alexander. 2022a. “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module A: Automotive Bridge 
Loans.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 1.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/2/ 
———. 2022b. “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module C: Restructuring Chrysler 
Through Bankruptcy.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 1.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/4/ 
———. 2022c. “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module E: Emergency Assistance for 
Chrysler Financial.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 1.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/6/ 
Nygaard, Kaleb B. 202 2. “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry: Module B: Restructuring 
General Motors Through Bankruptcy.” Journal of Financial Crises : 4, no. 1 . 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/3/ 
363
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 67 ---
Obama, Barack, H. 2009 a. “Remarks by the President on the American Automotive 
Industry.” The White House. March 30, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/remarks-president-american-automotive-industry-
33009 
———. 2009b. “Remarks by the President on General Motors Restructuring.” The White 
House. June 1, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/remarks-president-general-motors-restructuring 
———. 2010. “Fighting for American Auto Workers.” July 30, 2010.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/fighting-american-auto-workers-visit-chrysler-
jefferson-north-assembly-plant-barack-obama  
Office of the Auditor General of Canada  (OACG). 2014. “2014 Fall report of the Auditor 
General of Canada; Chapter 5: Support to the Automotive Sector.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/2014-fall-report-auditor-general-canada-chapter-5-
support-automotive-sector 
Paulson, Henry M. , Jr. 2008a. “Statement on Stabilizing the Automotive Industry.” US 
Department of the Treasury. December 19, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/secretary-paulson-statement-stabilizing-
automotive-industry  
———. 2008b. “Determination, December 19, 2008, and Letters from Henry M. Paulson, Jr., 
to Members of the House of Representatives, December 23, 2008 .” US Department of the 
Treasury. December 19, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/determination  
———. 2010. On the Brink: Inside the Race to Stop the Collapse of the Global Financial 
System. New York: Business Plus, Hachette Books.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/brink-inside-race-stop-collapse-global-financial-system 
Posner, Eric A. 2012. “Deference to the Executive in the United States after September 11: 
Congress, the Courts, and the Office of Legal Counsel.” 35 Harvard Journal of Law and Public 
Policy 213 (2012).   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/deference-executive-united-states-after-
september-11-congress-courts-and-office 
Ransom, Kevin. 2010. “How the Car Companies Lobby the Government : Millions Spent, But 
the Message Is Changing.” Autoblog.com. May 7, 2010.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/how-car-companies-lobby-government-
millions-spent-message-changing  
Rattner, Steven . 2011. Overhaul: An Insider’s Account of the Obama Administration’s 
Emergency Rescue of the Auto Industry. Boston, MA: Mariner Books.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/overhaul-insiders-account-obama-administrations-
emergency-rescue-auto-industry 
364
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 68 ---
———. 2022. “YPFS Lessons Learned Interview with Steven Rattner.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ypfs-lesson-learned-oral-history-project-interview-
steven-rattner 
Roe, Mark J. and David Skeel. 2009. “Assessing the Chrysler Bankruptcy.” Harvard John M. 
Olin Center for Law, Economics, And Business, Discussion Paper No. 645. September 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3688 
Rogers, David. 2008. “Bernanke: Don’t Count on the Fed”. Politico. December 9, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bernanke-dont-count-fed 
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs  (Senate Banking Committee ). 
2008. “Examining the State of the Domestic Automobile Industry —Part II.” Hearing, 
December 4, 2008, Doc. HRG-2008-BHU-0004. Washington, DC: G.P.O., 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/examining-state-domestic-automobile-industry-part-ii  
Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, Office of the (SIGTARP) . 
2009a. “Quarterly Report to Congress.” April 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/april-2009-office-special-inspector-general-troubled-
asset-relief-program-sigtarp-quarterly  
———. 2009b. “Quarterly Report to Congress.” October 21, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/october-2009-office-special-inspector-general-troubled-
asset-relief-program-quarterly  
———. 2010. “Quarterly Report to Congress.” October 26, 2010.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-october-26-2010 
———. 2016. “Quarterly Report to Congress.” October 26, 2016.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/office-special-inspector-general-troubled-asset-relief-
program-quarterly-report-congress 
Statista. 2022. “Number of light vehicle dealership outlets in the United States  between 
January 1, 2009, and 2021.” Accessed March 10, 2022.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/number-light-vehicle-dealership-outlets-
united-states-between-january-1-2009-and  
Treasury, US Department of the (Treasury). n.d.a. “Troubled Assets Relief Program.” 
Webpage.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/troubled-assets-relief-program-tarp 
———. n.d.b. “Troubled Assets Relief Program:  Auto Industry: Program overview.” 
Webpage.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/auto-industry-program-overview 
———. n.d.c. “Guidelines for Automotive Industry Financing Program.” Webpage.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/guidelines-automotive-industry-financing-program-aifp  
365
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 69 ---
———. n.d.d. “GMAC Timeline.” Webpage.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gmac-timeline 
———. 2008. “General Motors Warrant Agreement.”. December 31, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/warrant-agreement  
———. 2009a. “Treasury Announces Auto Supplier Support Program.” Press release , 
March 19, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-announces-auto-supplier-support-program 
———. 2009b. “Obama Administration’s New Warrantee Commitment Program.” Fact 
sheet, March 30, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/obama-administrations-new-warrantee-commitment-
program-fact-sheet  
———. 2009c. “Obama Administration New Path to Viability for GM & Chrysler .” Fact 
sheet, March 31, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/obama-administration-new-path-viability-gm-chrysler  
———. 2009d. “Obama Administration Auto Restructuring Initiative: Chrysler -Fiat 
Alliance.” Press release, April 30, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4045 
———. 2009e. “Fact Sheet: Obama Administration Auto Restructuring Initiative General 
Motors Restructuring.” Press release, May 31, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/fact-sheet-obama-administration-auto-restructuring-
initiative-general-motors-restructuring 
———. 2011. “Treasury Announces Agreement to Exit Remaining Stake in Chrysler Group 
LLC.” Press release,  June 2, 2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4047 
———. 2013a. “GM Timeline.” December 9, 2013.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-treasury-department-office-public-affairs-gm-
timeline  
———. 2013b. “TARP Transactions Report—Investments.” December 10, 2013.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/tarp-transactions-report-investments-
period-ending-december-10-2013 
———. 2014. “Treasury Sells Entire Ally Financial Stake, Taking Total Recovery to $19.6 
Billion and Closing Auto Rescue Program.” Press release, December 19, 2014.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/treasury-sells-entire-ally-financial-stake-taking-total-
recovery-196-billion-and-closing 
Unemployment Compensation Extension Act of 2008  (UCE Act) , S.3688, 110th United 
States Congress.  
366
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module Z Wiggins et al.

--- Page 70 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/s3688-bill-provide-additional-emergency-
unemployment-compensation-amend-emergency-economic 
White House, The. 2008. “Fact Sheet: Financing Assistance to Facilitate the Restructuring of 
Auto Manufacturers to Attain Financial Viability.” Fact sheet, December 19, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3608 
———. 2009a. “GM February 17 Plan: Viability Determination.” Fact sheet, March 30, 2009. 
  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/gm-february-17-plan-viability-determination  
———. 2009b. “Obama Administration Auto Restructuring Initiative .” Press release, April 
30, 2009.   
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/realitycheck/the_press_office/Obama-
Administration-Auto-Restructuring-Initiative  
———. 2010. “Annual Report of the White House Council on Automotive Communities and 
Workers.” May 2010.   
https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/fcic/YPFS/2010AnnualReport.pdf 
Wiggins, Rosalind Z., and Vaasavi Unnava. 2020. “Aid to Airlines and Other Critical 
Industries During Crises.” April 1, 2020.   
https://som.yale.edu/sites/default/files/2022-
01/Critical%20Industries_Aid%20to%20Airlines%20and%20other%20Critical%20Indust
ries%20During%20Crises_0.pdf 
Wiggins, Rosalind Z. , Aidan Lawson, Steven  Kelly, Lily S.  Engbith, and Andrew Metrick. 
2021. “The Rescue of American International Group , Module Z: Overview," Journal of 
Financial Crises 3, no. 1, 208–281.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss1/8  
Wilson, Linus. 2009. “Lessons for the TARP Warrants from 1983 Chrysler Auction. ” 
Academy of Accounting and Financial Studies Journal, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 69 -76. December 
31, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/lessons-tarp-warrants-1983-chrysler-
auction  
Zanger-Tishler, Michael , and Rosalind  Z. Wiggins. 2021. "The Rescue of Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac, Module D: Treasury’s GSE MBS Pu rchase Program,” Journal of Financial Crises 
3, no. 1, 366–386.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol3/iss1/12 
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
367
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1