--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Erik Sirri Lessons Learned: Erik Sirri 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2022) "Lessons Learned: Erik Sirri," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 4, 
640-642. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1473 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/37 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss4/37

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Erik Sirri 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Erik Sirri served as director of the Division of Trading and Markets at the US Securities and 
Exchange Commission  (SEC) from 2006 to 2009 . In his post,  he was responsible for matters 
relating to the regulation of stock and option exchanges, national securities associations, 
brokers-dealers, clearing agencies, transfer agents, and credit rating agencies . Before joining 
the SEC in 1996, he was an assistant professor of finance at the Harvard Business School from 
1989 to 1995. Sirri served as the SEC’s chief economist until 1999, before returning to academia. 
He is currently a professor of finance at Babson College. His research interests include the 
interaction of securities law and finance, securities market structure, investment management, 
and capital markets. This Lesson Learned is based on an interview with Sirri held in May 2021; 
the full transcript may be accessed here. 
Consolidated agency oversight of economically similar financial activities will 
improve each regulator’s ability to evaluate risk and recognize vulnerabilities. 
In the years leading to the 2007–2009 Global Financial Crisis, US financial regulators (of 
which there are f ive at the federal level) generally lacked a consolidated view of the  
significant amount of risk and leverage that accumulated outside of the commercial financial 
institutions. The Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act  in 1999 did not provide for consolidated 
supervision of investment bank holding companies. The SEC lacked the supervisory 
authority by statute that would have allowed it to see some of the warning signs of the 
coming crisis; its oversight was limited to broker-dealers and did not extend to their holding 
company parents , wh ich may have had questionable holdings or unreasonable leverage 
within other subsidiaries.  
The collapse of Bear Stearns showed how quickly liquidity can vanish from a firm  that has 
trouble at one of its affiliates , but Sirri noted that a year and a half before its demise, Bear 
Stearns had its most profitable year ever. From the SEC’s limited vantage point, the financial 
system seemed to be in good shape, not a teetering framework, he said. 
In retrospect there was a regul atory hole there, and Congress should probably  have 
filled it. You didn’t want firms as big as our investment banks running around without 
consolidated supervision, or certainly without the ability for someone to . . .  look 
holistically at the risks and the amount of liquidity across the whole entity. There was 
no one to do that, and these were big, important firms. 
The Office of Thrift Supervision was the only regulator that had statutory supervision over 
any holding companies, namely those that also owned  a thrift institution. But it failed to 
exercise that oversight in the lead-up to the crisis.  
Lacking statutory consolidated supervisory authority, the various agencies need ed to work 
together to provide that holistic view of risk. Agencies including the SEC, the Federal Reserve 
640

--- Page 4 ---
System, and the Treasury Department , among others , failed to communicate effectively 
across the fragmented regulatory regime that also included the Treasury’s Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision.  
The authority was divided , and they did not all play ball well. I think that was one 
thing that was unfortunate. But this is politics. Regulatory entities want to defend 
their own turf, so that’s somewhat to be expected. 
To be effective, oversight  must be based in statutory authority, have real legitimacy 
behind it, and include the power of enforcement.  
The SEC gained some broad-based supervisory authority of broker-dealers and their holding 
companies through rulemaking, rather than statute, with mixed results, said Sirri. A 2004 
SEC rule  established a voluntary oversight program o f consolidated supervisory entities 
(CSEs)—holding companies that agreed to increased supervision by the SEC. This was meant 
to fulfill consolidated supervision requirements that firms had to comply with to do business 
in the European Union. In exchange, the SEC offered them a carrot. He said,   
What the 2004 rules did was a trade -off. The SEC gained oversight and some 
transparency into the risks at the holding company level. That was something that it 
did not have before. It didn’t do it by statute; it did it by rule. It could look at the risks 
and see the risk controls at the level of the holding company of the big investment 
banks. The 2004 rules also let the SEC require a pool of unrestricted liquidity a t the 
holding company level. The SEC had not been able to implement these regulations 
before. In exchange, it gave the investment banks an alternate method for computing 
the required level of broker-dealer capital that they held. 
That trade-off of a computation method for broker -dealers in exchange for oversight over 
the holding company gave rise to the notion that the SEC had lifted limits on leverage across 
financial firms, leading to the crisis. Sirri explained,  
It allowed for the c omputation of actual broker -dealer capital using a different 
measure. That’s all it did, and in particular, it did not change the required broker -
dealer capital. At these firms, their broker-dealers didn't fall out of capital compliance. 
They didn't run into a situation where they ran out of capital. The problems arose at 
the holding company level, where the SEC had a window into what was going on, but 
we didn't have statutory oversight. Then people started thinking the SEC allowed a 
ton of leverage to occu r in these firms at the parent level. We couldn ’t have stopped 
them from taking holding company leverage. We didn’t have the authority to do that. 
The CSE program tried to create a holistic supervisory system over holding companies, but 
it didn’t have enou gh authority. Sirri pondered: If the SEC not stepped in with rulemaking, 
might Congress have felt the need to act, or might the Federal Reserve have assumed 
supervision? Having only supervisory authority over broker -dealers, once the crisis 
exploded, the S EC’s role was  limited. It couldn’t provide the necessary liquidity to affected 
firms, as the Fed was able to do, and its assigned functions couldn’t stabilize the markets.  
641
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
Dated: December 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021–06 
 
642
Lessons Learned: Erik Sirri Cardona