--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 2 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Scott G. Alvarez, Esq., Part 2 Lessons Learned: Scott G. Alvarez, Esq., Part 2 
Steven Kelly 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kelly, Steven (2022) "Lessons Learned: Scott G. Alvarez, Esq., Part 2," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : 
Iss. 2, 2022-2026. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1379 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/90 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss2/90

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned  
Scott G. Alvarez, Esq., Part 2 
By Steven Kelly 
Scott G. Alvarez was general counsel of the Federal Reserve Board during the Global Financial 
Crisis (GFC). He met with the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) to discuss a litany of 
legal aspects related to the Fed’s interventions under its emergency liquidity provision author-
ity under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. We summarize some highlights from our 
April 2022 interview with Mr. Alvarez below; the full transcript of thi s interview is available 
here. The transcript of an earlier Lessons Learned interview with Mr. Alvarez, conducted in 
2018, can be accessed here. 
The genesis and design of each  Section 13(3) facility tends to be a very cooperative 
process between the Federal Reserve Banks and the Board. The individual Reserve 
Banks are essential for operationalizing emergency lending facilities. 
Alvarez emphasized how organic and cooperative the process for developing an emergency 
lending facility was across the Federal Reserve System during the GFC. While Section 13(3) 
implementation involves the regional Reserve Bank(s) running the program(s), being satis-
factorily secured, recommending the interest rates, and more, the Board played a very direct 
role in the analysis and design of such facilities before ultimately authorizing them. It began 
with monitoring market and economic developments, a collaborative and ongoing effort be-
tween Reserve Banks and Board staff.  
What would usually happen was . . . for the broad-based facilities, we were watching 
the markets, watching what was going on; economists at the Board and economists 
at the Reserve Banks were paying attention to that on a moment-by-moment basis. 
As unusual developments were identified, Alvarez recalled, the Board focus ed on the issue 
and assigned a team composed of Board staff and  Reserve Bank staff to assess the need for 
an emergency facility and possibly design the terms:  
And so, when it looked like there was a market that was becoming illiquid, jamming 
up, freezing for one reason or another, the interest rates were getting out of whack or 
the transactions were becoming just too few, generally what would happen was 
somebody at the Board would raise a concern —[former Fed Vice Chair] Don Kohn 
was in charge of a lot of the coordination. And Don would have these regular meetings 
with staff. And we would brainstorm about various things. And then a person or a 
group of people wo uld be sent off to develop a facility. And they would be in touch 
with the Reserve Bank people, and there’d be Reserve [Bank] people and Board staff 
on the same group. And we would be talking by phone and emails to try to figure out 
what would be a sensible approach and what we could actually operationally do. 
A facility ultimately gets operationalized by a Reserve Bank—typically the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York. However, Alvarez said that in 2008 the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston  
2022

--- Page 4 ---
had volunteered to ru n any facility they could. With the New York Fed getting particularly 
busy, and many money market funds located in the Boston district,  the Asset-Backed Com-
mercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF) was assigned to be run 
out of Boston. 
Alvarez also discussed how any possible changes to the facilities after their initial authoriza-
tions were also subject to ongoing communication across the Fed system. While some facility 
changes received official Board votes, others were implemented at the regional Fed level. A 
facility would be presented to the Board informally, with appropriate  details, but also 
broadly—to get the Board’s view generally. That would help indicate when a change might 
need to go to a vote at the Board , or when it could be implemented under the existing au-
thorization granted to the Reserve Bank. Moreover, Alvarez noted: 
There was a lot of walki ng around the halls to get a sense of what the governors 
thought and keeping them up to speed, just briefing them on things. And you ’d get a 
sense of, “Well, do they care enough about this?” If somebody objects, let’s get every-
body together and talk it through. If everybody says, “this is fine,” then you just move 
forward. Because time was of the essence on a lot of these things. You know, it was 
very dynamic in that respect. 
Section 13(3)’s requirement that the provision of liquidity be “indorsed or otherwise 
secured to the satisfaction of the Federal Reserve Bank” has a large discretionary com-
ponent—but cannot be less than reasonably expecting repayment. The Dodd-Frank 
Act of 2010, by explicitly adding that the Fed  must be secured sufficient to “protect 
taxpayers from losses,” effectively codified the Fed’s existing interpretation of 13(3). 
During the GFC, Fed policy makers and legal staff were of the view that, for the Fed to be 
secured to its satisfaction, it had to be reasonably confident it would be fully repaid. While 
the central bank may experience some losses in its operations, the ex-ante expectation of loss 
was seen as a fiscal decision.  The Dodd-Frank Act, among other amendments, added lan-
guage to 13(3) to require that all discounting be secured sufficiently enough “to protect tax-
payers from losses.” 
Alvarez did not view this addition as meaningfully changing the Fed’s implementation of the 
statute. Alvarez said of their pre-Dodd-Frank interventions during the GFC: 
The Fed was very aware that we were trying to mitigate the financial crisis using tax-
payer money—any losses the Fed experienced on its emergency lending would have 
been borne by the taxpayer through [the] reduced Fed earnings needed to cover those 
losses. 
Indeed, he viewed the new language as standing behind the Fed’s practice to not provide 
assistance in cases where the risk of bearing losses was more appreciable. 
Alvarez also noted that while the expectation of repayment served as a “kind of floor” on 
being satisfactorily secured, that determination was the second step in any emergency 
2023
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
intervention. He said the Fed viewed the first consideration  under Section 13(3) to be  
whether to provide liquidity at all and that the Fed centered this determination on the sys-
temic importance of the target of the intervention. Then, the Fed would think about being 
able to get sufficiently secured. He said of the GFC: 
Even if there is a lot of s ecurity, the Fed has no obligation to lend under 13(3). It ’s 
totally discretionary. And the Fed could decide it’s just not going to lend to someone. 
Indeed, during 2007-2009, we were inundated with requests from people to borrow 
from the Fed, and they were  pledging everything you can imagine. And the Fed said 
all but a few handfuls of times, “no, we’re not gonna do it.” And it was largely because 
the Fed thought that a lot of the borrowers were not systemically important. They 
could be allowed to fail. 
Regulation A is but one outline of an authorization to the Reserve Banks to lend under 
Section 13(3). It does not define the outside limits of the Fed’s statutory authority un-
der 13(3). 
Regulation A (Reg A) does not strictly define the limits of the Fed’s statutory authority under 
Section 13(3), as is sometimes presumed, but instead outlines  “one specific authorization”  
under the authority. Alvarez noted that Reg A is not written like other bank regulation, which 
is narrowly prescriptive; rather , Reg A outlines an ongoing authorization to the Reserve 
Banks if the terms of Reg A are met.  
However, it may not always be fit ting for the contours of a given cr isis, and it was regularly 
deviated from during the GFC. As Alverez noted, during the GFC the Board approved many 
broader additional tools under Section 13(3): “All the broad-based lending facilities are out-
side of what Reg A authorized.” Alvarez stressed that the rule represented “the way the Fed 
was feeling about discount window and other kinds of loans at the time it wrote Reg A.”  It 
does not exhaustively outline the authorities provided by the 13(3) statute—and may not be 
able to. He noted that, for instance, Reg A had not contemplated broad-based 13(3) facilities 
in advance of the GFC. 
But what we were confronting during the financial crisis was a need for lending far 
beyond what Reg A had authorized, what Reg A contemplated. When Reg A was writ-
ten, they didn't know that they would need broad -based facilities or other kinds of 
stuff. And so, the question was, can the Fed do that without amending Reg A? 
And it seemed pretty clear and simple to me that it could, as long as the Board did the 
authorization in accordance with Section 13(3). And so, the Reserve Banks were free 
to ask the Board for authority to lend under different conditions than Reg A had au-
thorized. And the Board obviously did that. 
While a Reserve Bank is free to submit a 13(3) program proposal to the Board that does not 
strictly hew to Reg A, following the regulation more closely  may increase the likelihood of 
the Board approving the structure—particularly if Reg A is still representative of the Board’s 
views on emergency liquidity assistance. 
2024
Lessons Learned: Scott G. Alvarez, Esq., Part 2 Kelly

--- Page 6 ---
Utilizing an SPV structure brings several operational benefits. Contrary to a common 
misconception, the structure is not used to satisfy a legal requirement. 
While many have attributed the Fed’s frequent use of special purpose vehicles (SPVs) to im-
plement its 13(3) interventions as having to do with a legal requirement, this has not been 
the view of the Fed.  
Many have postulated that the Fed sets up an SPV when it wishes to execute purchases under 
13(3) owing to a restriction that the statute provides only for lending: the idea being that the 
SPV executes the purchases, and the Fed lends to the SPV to fund them—thus circumventing 
this legal restriction . It’s possible that the misconception is attributable to the term “dis-
count,” a dated banking word. However, the Fed has long interpreted “discount” as being 
inclusive of both direct advances and purchases of third -party notes—as is consistent with 
its historical usage.1  
Indeed, internal legal memos from the GFC era show the Fed evaluating legali ty of the dis-
counting done via SPVs on a look-through basis—as if the SPV did not exist between the Fed 
and the SPV’s counterparties.2 Alvarez noted that this evaluation was very important, as the 
Fed did not want to open itself to accusations that it was simply lending to itself. 
Alvarez noted that the Fed  viewed use of the SPV structure —including for broad-based fa-
cilities—as providing management, accounting, and legal advantages to an intervention, es-
pecially when the Fed operates multiple 13(3) programs in parallel.  
The idea of doing multiple [SPVs] rather than one is really: it is not easier to have just 
one SPV for all the facilities and have it be monstrous. 
Each intervention has its own specific terms, timeline, capital structure, and management 
team. The management teams may also be in geographically separate Reserve Banks, de-
pending on which one(s) is administering a given intervention. 
The SPV structure si mplifies the reporting of income and the management of any sales of 
assets discounted by the facility. Moreover, the degree of corporate separation from both the 
Fed and other 13(3) interventions provided by an SPV structure may give those other enti-
ties some protection in the event a 13(3) program is sued. 
The “notes, drafts, and bills of exchange” language in Section 13(3) limits the Federal 
Reserve’s discounting authority to instruments of credit. 
 
1 See also: Federal Reserve Bulletin (March 1958) and June Oversight Report: The AIG Rescue, Its Impact on 
Markets, and the Government’s Exit Strategy (June 10, 2010). 
2 See: Legal Memorandum to Board of Governors Re: The Authority of the Federal Reserve  (April 2, 2008) and 
Memo to File Re: The Authority of the Federal Reserve to Provide Extensions of Credit in Connection with a 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) (March 9, 2009). 
2025
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
Under Section 13(3), the Fed may discount “notes, drafts, and bills of exchange,” which limits 
the Fed to credit transactions. As Alvarez said: 
To be a note, it has to be an obligation of somebody to repay a set amount at a timing 
that the parties agree to: Money is given to them, and they have to repay that money. 
So, there's a lot of ways to document a note, and “bills of exchange” and “drafts” are 
actually two ways of documenting notes. An advance is another way to document a 
note. But it’s all credit transactions. 
While the Fed can accept a much broader range  of assets as collateral, there has to be an 
underlying credit transaction. According to Alvarez, this would limit the Fed from directly  
purchasing assets like equities or real assets. 
For future crisis-fighters, Alvarez says: The statutory authorities really matter! These 
authorities meaningfully shape crisis-fighters’ response, or lack thereof. 
And so, I hope that when folks read through the material, they understand not so 
much, “oh those lawyers were too stodgy, and they didn ’t give their decision makers 
enough flexibility.” I hope they come away with the idea that, look, it does matter what 
you write down in the statute! Make it a useful statute that ’s going to allow the gov-
ernment to respond in a way that is helpful. Otherwise, you do hav e calamities that 
occur and there is nothing that you can do about them, and, as a decision maker, 
you're just sort of left to watch, and that ’s painful. Painful for consumers, painful for 
the economy, not just painful for the decision maker, but painful for the people we’re 
trying to protect by having this authority. 
 
Dated: July 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022-09 
2026
Lessons Learned: Scott G. Alvarez, Esq., Part 2 Kelly