--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Sadiq Malik Lessons Learned: Sadiq Malik 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lynch, Mary Anne Chute (2022) "Lessons Learned: Sadiq Malik," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 
458-462. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1279 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/23 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/23

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Sadiq Malik 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Sadiq Malik was a member of the Obama administration’s Task Force on the Auto Industry, 
which was established in 2009 and charged with providing aid to Chrysler and General Motors, 
and later to other entities, to avoid their disorderly failure and the loss of a million or more jobs. 
The Auto Task Force worked intensively throughout 2009 to swiftly negotiate with the 
corporate leadership, unions, investors, and other stakeholders of the two manuf acturers, to 
design an orderly restructuring that would put the companies on a path to stability.  Malik, 
working for the Auto Task Force , helped take General Motors through the largest industrial 
bankruptcy reorganization in US history. He also helped Steven Rattner, head of the Task Force, 
chronicle the team’s work in Rattner’s book, Overhaul: An Insider’s Account of the Obama 
Administration’s Emergency Rescue of the Auto Industry. This “Lessons Learned” summary is 
based on an interview with Mr. Malik. 
There are many opinions on when it is appropriate for the government to intervene 
in the private sector; however, if the system is collapsing, then t he government must 
intervene to prevent chaos.  
When and why and to what extent the government needs to step i nto a crisis is not an easy 
decision to make, but Malik believes there are times when government action is necessary:  
[At some point ] the public institutions do have to step in, such as when the private 
sector stops functioning as it’s meant to function. That is exactly why the government 
exists—to make sure that if the private sector is failing, they can step in to stabilize it. 
Otherwise, there would be chaos. My personal view is that if the private sector could 
have solved the problem, it should have been left to the private sector.  
Once the government decides to intervene, leaders must set a vision, create a sense of 
calm, find the best specialists to deal with the situation, and then get out of the way. 
Malik’s advice to leaders is straightforward and allows for no wavering —leadership, the 
courage to set a vision, and direction are necessary and vital in a crisis:  
When you’re in a position of power, like the president and the executive branch, it 
really is up to you to set the agenda for the country, to set a vision and create a sense 
of calm when things are not calm.  
[ . . . ] people need a sense of calm, vision, and a high-level policy objective that they 
can work towards. It doesn’t have to be 100 percent right because you’re never going 
to get it 100 percent right. You ’re dealing with so many uncertainties in a crisis, that 
you will never get it 100 percent right. But , as long as you are being focused and 
thinking about setting a goal for the country, knowing that you may have to change it 
458

--- Page 4 ---
along the way, and giving the people you are representing at the executive branches, 
presidents and others, it ’s one of your key re sponsibilities to create calm in the 
country, to show that there's a far -out effect and execute towards [that goal]. People 
will understand and forgive you if you do it genuinely and try to find the right solution 
and the right structure. But, to keep it chaotic is not sensible at all. 
Malik also shared that an additional requirement for effective crisis management is for the 
policymakers to realize that they may not have the expertise needed to craft the needed 
solutions. In that case, once they have set the vision, they have to be humble enough to hand 
things over to the experts and let them execute towards the vision: 
A leader needs to be self-aware that there are professionals who deal with situations of this 
nature, and they have to find the right people to deal with the problem. To the extent you tap 
into those people, you need to give them autonomy. There ’s oversight, but you need to give 
them the right governance structure within which they can work, with a level of autonomy 
and the right checks and b alances. It ’s not unfettered autonomy. There must be some 
overarching objective, but you also need to make clear that you are not going to get your 
political objectives get in the way of the right solution. The process must be played out. If you 
start inte rfering with the process of finding the right solutions  for your own political 
objectives, everything falls apart.  
Getting Congress to approve crisis funds swiftly and in a bulk manner provide s 
policymakers the ability to act quickly once actions are decided. To do otherwise risks 
paralyzing the rescue as politics are debated. 
Malik attributes much of the success of the auto industry bailout to the Troubled Asset s 
Relief Program (TARP) that was approved by Congress in October 2008: “One of the reasons 
we were successful was because we could take part in TARP .” Having those funds available 
(once President Bush determined to use them) permitted the “technocrats” to “move quickly 
versus waiting for the approval from Congress.” In Malik’s view,  the alternative would have 
been a disaster: 
If that capital had not been passed by Congress and had to be approved every  time 
you were bailing out a business, I don’t think we could have done our job. Point being, 
that politics can be a tricky situation, and if politicians must make decisions on every 
capital investment during the crisis, no decisions might get made because of the 
political fighting. 
For the most efficient and effective results, you should k eep politics out of the crisis 
and decision-making. 
Malik is adamant about keeping politics out of any government intervention in a crisis.  
If you have a team of professionals dealing with a crisis, then you should leave them 
to do their job so they can do what’s best for that particular situation, instead of trying 
to win political points, which can have secondary and tertiary effects. In my position, 
I never felt any pressure politically from anybody to do anything. Our goal was: Do 
459
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
your job. Figure out what ’s the best way to help restructure GM, and w ork with the  
management teams to find the right business plan. That’s what we did. 
Making good crisis decisions does not mean that every party must be treated equally. 
The best decisions consider the role of the party, how they fit within the larger 
objectives and structure of the intervention, and what ind ividual solution would 
contribute to achieving the overall objectives.  
The overarching objective in structuring the GM rescue was to try to put the company on a 
path to long-term viability. To do that, the Auto Task Force made decisions as if they were a 
private investor, Malik says, and it was how every stakeholder was managed: 
There were lots of liabilities, whether they were pension related, creditors who were 
lent money, suppliers who were owed  money. . . Various stakeholders took haircuts. 
Some more than others. I’m pretty sure that the suppliers, who were owed money, 
got all their money back because if you don ’t do that, you basically bankrupt the 
suppliers, and if you do that, how do you get the parts? If you don’t get the parts, how 
do you make cars? It was almost a commercial decision  process, and as part of the 
back and forth the Treasury ended up with a certain stake in GM. GM did not make its 
money back. But Chrysler and the auto fina ncial companies made their money back 
and more.  
The basic focus and scope of the intervention needs to be discussed and agreed to 
upfront.  
Many policymakers have expressed the view that a crisis is not the time to address 
fundamental weaknesses of an ent ity or system. Crises are by nature urgent situations; 
distraction can lead to delay, which can lead to disaster. Therefore, many authorities believe 
that the primary focus should be narrow, on how to stabilize the entity or system as quickly 
as possible—first put out the fire and later ask how the fire started.  
Malik, however, sees it differently : “Any crisis should be taken as an opportunity. You 
shouldn’t let a crisis go to waste.” This view informed his approach (and to some extent that 
of the Auto Team) during the crisis. For General Motors, he explained, the auto crisis was a 
time to educate corporate management on the larger crisis around them: 
Over time, organizations, can tend to only look at their own internal views. [General 
Motors] couldn’t see the bigger picture around them with a 360-degree view because 
they were so inwardly focused. 
We were critical, and we viewed [their offered]  business plans from the lens of a 
private lender or a private person bailing them out. Said differently —the customer’s 
last resort. We wanted the management teams to make plans that were realistic—not 
plans that were impractical and that would not solve the problem s, and not 
permanently fix the issues inside these companies . . . We looked at the plans thinking, 
if the Treasury is going to bail them out, the US government is going to bail them out—
that really is the taxpayers bailing them out. From our  perspective, we had a 
460
Lessons Learned: Sadiq Malik Lynch

--- Page 6 ---
significant amount of pressure to do right by the taxpayers. It’s not our money. It’s the 
money of the taxpayers.  
. . . Critical questioning on our part helped to make sure they were solving the crisis 
in a more realistic manner. It gave the management team [the opportunity] to say —
Do we need to cut benefits? Do we need to rework our liabilities on our balance sheet? 
Do we need to rework our relationship with our suppliers, the contracts we have with 
them? What about our relationship with our dealers? We did not push them in any 
direction. A lot of what we did was a sk the right questions so they could get to the 
right plan on their own. 
Their management teams came to see that this is an opportunity to right -size their 
business so that it can function, [and] the next time a crisis of this n ature comes 
around, they can survive and thrive and not come back to the government looking for 
a bailout.  
It is not a perfect tool, but an expedited bankruptcy is the fastest way to stabilize a 
company in a crisis and in this case it worked well.   
Given the magnitude of the crisis at GM—“These are very old companies. They had all sorts 
of liabilities . . . massive balance sheets, lots of leverage, lots of liabilities related to pensions 
and labor” —the Task Force t hought it was best for the company to file for bankruptcy 
because that was the best way to restructure the business and the quickest way to do it, Malik 
said.  
We worked with the management team and tried  different ways of running their 
numbers, but their cashflow profile, their financial profile was such that their liquidity 
needs were massive. There was so much in liabilities that if you just gave money, you 
could not be sure if—or how—you would get your money back. Going through the 
bankruptcy allowed you to create more value and more ability to make your money 
back.  
Given the crisis , and given the need for speed, I think doing the [expedited]  
bankruptcy in the organization was the fastest way to achieve a stabilized business. 
Otherwise, it would have ta ken forever. Getting to the other side was quickest with 
the bankruptcy . . . With the [expedited] bankruptcy, you were in and out in a month 
and you were done. They created a new GM, and it stabilized them. They were able to 
move on. I think that type of expeditiousness is good.  
When government lends money via equity purchases, it must develop an exit plan that 
considers how it will recoup its investment but must also consider other important 
factors, such as the government being a majority shareholder in a private company.   
The government invested in stock equity to enable GM to get back in business without the 
burden of enormous loan debt. This engendered a debate and criticism at the time. 
461
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
There’s a moral dilemma because the government had a big stock equity stake at GM. 
It was always an internal debate . . . Within the Treasury, there was a group who felt 
that the government should not be a big equity owner of large private businesses, 
because . . .  that kills private investment. Then, there were other people who felt that, 
if you come to the Treasury to ask for capital, then the government is going to take all 
the appropriate protections for the taxpayers.  
Malik further explained that a fter the restructuring , the Treasury owned more than 50 
percent of GM’s stock; there was a team at Treasury charged with managing that investment. 
In such a situation , he continued, the timing of any sale of the shares had to be balanced 
against the government ’s remaining the majority shareholder of a private compan y. The 
government sold its shares at a loss. In Malik’s opinion, the decision was made to exit early 
rather than waiting for the stock price to go up. In such cases, he noted, you lose the ability 
to capture more gains on future increases in the stock price.  
_____________________________________ 
Dated: April 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-24 
 
462
Lessons Learned: Sadiq Malik Lynch