--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs 
June Rhee 
Yale School of Management School of Management 
Junko Oguri 
Yale School of Management 
Greg Feldberg 
Yale School of Management School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Rhee, June; Oguri, Junko; Feldberg, Greg; and Metrick, Andrew (2022) "Broad-Based Capital Injection 
Programs," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 1-48. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1257 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/1 
This Survey is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This survey is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol4/iss1/1

--- Page 3 ---
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs1 
June Rhee,2 Junko Oguri,3 Greg Feldberg,4 and Andrew Metrick5 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Survey   
April 08, 2022 
Abstract 
This paper surveys 36 broad-based capital injection (BBCI) programs and attempts to 
identify some best (and worst) practices. We argue that it is crucial to distinguish between 
programs implemented during acute (“panic”) and chronic  (“debt overhang”) phases of a 
crisis, where th e goals of program design should be different.  In an acute phase, programs 
should be designed to influence the behavior of bank counterparties, while in chronic phases, 
the focus should be on bank behavior itself.  With this framing, we identify seven themes to 
guide program design, and provide many illustrative examples for the policymaker’s tool kit. 
Keywords: broad-based capital injection , equity injection , financial crisis interventions , 
recapitalization 
  
 
1 This survey explores part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering the responses to the Global Financial Crisis that pertain to broad -based capital injection 
programs. Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises at   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-offinancial-crises/. 
2 Director, MMS in Systemic Risk, and Senior Editor, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
3 PhD student, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University . 
4 Research Scholar and Director of Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
5 Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of Management. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
Introductory Note: This survey is an analysis of important considerations for policymakers 
seeking to establish a broad -based capital injection (BBCI) program. It is based on insights 
derived from case studies of 36 specific BBCI programs the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability has completed and from the existing literature on the topic. While this su rvey can 
help inform a decision about whether or not to establish a BBCI program, our main purpose 
to assist policymakers who have already made that decision in designing the most effective 
program possible.  In analyzing the programs that are the focus of this survey, we used a 
color-coded system to highlight certain particularly noteworthy design features. Our color -
coding system is as follows: 
Color Meaning 
BLUE – INTERESTING A design feature that is interesting and that 
policymakers may want to consider. Typically, 
this determination is based on the observation 
that the design feature involves a unique and 
potentially promising way of addressing a 
challenge common to this type of program that 
may not be obvious. Less commonly, there will 
be empirical evidence or a widely held 
consensus that the design feature was effective 
in this context, in which case we will describe 
that evidence or consensus.  
YELLOW – CAUTION INDICATED A design feature that policymakers should 
exercise caution in considering. Typically, this 
determination is based on the observation that 
the designers of the feature later made 
significant changes to the feature with the 
intention of improving the functioning of the 
program. Less commonly, there will be 
empirical evidence or a widely held consensus 
that the design feature was ineffective in this 
context, in which case we will describe that 
evidence or consensus.  
This highlighting is not intended to be dis positive. The fact that a design feature is not 
highlighted or is highlighted yellow does not mean that it should not be considered or that it 
will never be effective under any circumstances. Similarly, the fact that a design feature is 
not highlighted or is highlighted blue does not mean that it should always be considered or 
will be effective under all circumstances. The highlighting is our subjective attempt to guide 
readers toward certain design features that (1) may not be obvious but are worth 
considering or (2) require caution. 
Introduction 
Financial crises occur when the banking system is undercapitalized. For government 
authorities, the most direct way to fix an undercapitalization problem is by simply injecting 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
new capital—the taxpayers effectively become investors in the banking system. Indeed, this 
direct approach is common throughout history, comprising 285 of the 1 ,886 total 
interventions in the Metrick and Schmelzing (2021) database. Of t hat total , 106 of t hese 
programs are classified as “broad -based,” with eligibility for many qualifying institutions.  
The database also shows that the frequency of such programs has been increasing over time, 
especially in wealthy countries.  This paper surveys 36 such broad-based capital-injection 
(BBCI) programs and attempts to identify some best (and worst) practices. 
Financial crises are messy affairs, and no two are the same. Furthermore, the institutional 
background and political context vary significantly across crises, and it is not realistic to 
expect a fixed playbook to fit all c ases. Despite this unavoidable morass, scholars have 
consistently found evidence that capital injections can facilitate crisis recovery.  Laeven and 
Valencia (2018) find that bank recapitalization helps the growth of financi ally dependent 
firms. Brei, Gambacorta, and von Peter  (2013) study 14 major economies from 1995 –2010 
and find that a “critical” level of recapitalization allows banks to expand lending in a crisis.  
In a broad comparative analysis of the efficacy of differe nt types of interventions, Tong and 
Wei (2020) analyze 198 policy actions for 16 countries during the Global Financial Crises  
(GFC) and conclude that “recapitalization of banks appears particularly effective in 
channeling the intervention effects from financial to nonfinancial sectors.” 
This evidence of effectiveness supports the use of BBCIs as an important part of the crisis -
fighting toolbox. But how should one design such programs? Policymakers have many 
consequential choices, ranging from straightforward term-sheet-level questions to issues of 
strategy and implementation. The main body of this paper discusses 17 of these Key Design 
Decisions, drawing lessons from the academic literature (which is sparse on specific design 
recommendations) and from the 36 case studies. 
The case-based approach used here cannot provide any statistically significant conclusions. 
That is the nature of this beast. But the mass of past experience, including many creative 
ideas and numerous missteps, should be absorbed by futur e designers of BBCIs. For those 
designers in a particular hurry, the conclusion of this survey discusses seven themes that 
emerge from our analysis . Many of these themes are tied to a key framing mechanism: 
program goals differ between acute and chronic ph ases of a crisis. Most BBCIs will list 
“increased bank lending” as a main goal of the program. Academic studies have reinforced 
this goal, with the effect on lending the most typical measure of program success. This goal 
is entirely appropriate during the chronic “debt overhang” phase of a cris is, when policy 
should be designed to directly influence the behavior of the banks. But during an acute 
“panic” phase of a crisis, an emphasis on bank lending is misplaced. In an ongoing or incipient 
panic, policy must focus on the behavior of bank counterparties, not on the banks themselves. 
It is the counterparties who are running, and if those runs are not mitigated, the later chronic 
phase will be more difficult to repair. We make extensive use of this framing throughout the 
paper. 
Figure 1 lists the 36 cases covered in this survey, with these cases divided into “acute” and 
“chronic” groups. In most cases, this categorization is obvious, as we see for example in the 
acute-phase programs announced at the height of th e GFC in October 2008, or the chronic -
3
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 6 ---
phase definition for all the capital injections in the later stages of the long Japanese financial 
crisis. However, in other cases , this categorization is less clear due to market conditions 
improving but recovery of market confidence still stalling. 
Figure 1: Programs Covered in This Survey: Acute and Chronic Groups 
Acute Chronic 
Austria FinStaG (GFC) Colombia FOGAFÍN capital injection (1999 & 2001) 
France SPPE (GFC) Denmark capital injections (GFC) 
Germany SoFFin (GFC) Finland (Nordic Crisis, 1992) 
Greece (GFC) Hungary bank recapitalization (1993–94) 
Hong Kong contingent bank capital facility 
(GFC)* 
Japan Financial Functions Stabilization Act (February 
1998) 
Hungary recapitalization scheme (GFC) Japan Prompt Recapitalization Act (August 1998) 
Indonesia Bank Restructuring Agency (Asian 
Financial Crisis) 
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans for Major Banks 
(GFC, 2009) 
Ireland recapitalization program (GFC) Japan Act on Strengthening Financial Functions (2004–
21) 
Israel bank shares arrangement (1983) Korea Bank Recapitalization Fund (GFC) 
Italy Tremonti bonds (GFC) Malaysia Danamodal (Asian Financial Crisis) 
Korea KDIC (Asian Financial Crisis) Nigeria AMCON (2010) 
Mexico PROCAPTE (Peso Crisis, 1995) Norway (Nordic Crisis, 1991) 
Poland 1925 FPIK capitalization (1925) Norway State Finance Fund (GFC) 
Russia bank capital support program (2014) Spain FROB (GFC) 
Thailand CSF 1998 (Asian Financial Crisis) Sweden Bank Support Authority (1993) 
UK bank recapitalisation scheme (GFC) Turkey Saving Deposit Insurance Fund (2000) 
US RFC (1933) US SCAP/CAP (GFC, 2009) 
US CPP (GFC, 2008) US CDCI (GFC, 2010) 
* When Hong Kong announced this program, it was precautionary, and the capital levels of banks were well above 8% 
and remaining so. 
 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
We categorize the 2009 GFC programs in the US and Japan as chronic, as the details for all of 
these were announced after short -term funding markets had considerably improved and 
program goals had switched away from rescue and toward recovery.  Similarly, most of the 
programs from the Asian Financial Crises are classified as acute, with the exception of 
Malaysia’s relatively late program. 
As an illustration of the important distinction between acute- and chronic-phase programs, 
consider two well-studied GFC program s in the US, the Capital Purchase Program (CPP) of 
late 2008 and the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program/Capital Assistance Program 
(SCAP/CAP) in early 2009. The CPP was announced and first implemented in October 2008, 
during the most acute phase of the GFC and coincident with BBCI programs in many other 
countries. This program had relatively simple terms, loose eligibility for partic ipation, and 
light restrictions on participant behavior.  In contrast, the  SCAP/CAP details were finalized 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
after short-term funding markets had calmed considerably  and included a novel stress test 
and relatively complex rules around any necessary injections. While ne ither of these 
program designs was perfect (as discussed in Key Design Decisions section), we believe that 
on balance both should be labeled as a success. But if one were to have flipped the program 
designs, we think that the outcomes would likely have been far worse. 
The remaining sections of this paper go through the specific Key Design Decisions in detail.  
We note at the outset of this analysis that most of these design decisions were made in real 
time, often during the most acute phases of a crisis. In almost all cases, the legal background 
for the programs was either new or untested, and many mistakes were made because of this 
time pressure and novelty. A metatheme of this paper—and of much of the work of the Yale 
Program on Financial Stability —is that p rogram design could be significantly improved if 
policymakers worked out some of these details in advance.  In the best case, there would be 
a flexible law passed during a quiet period that could be invoked in “emergencies” to enable 
the most common designs. 
Key Design Decisions 
1. Part of a Package: Was the BBCI program announced with different policy 
interventions, or was it announced stand -alone? Were there any intervention 
programs existing when the BBCI came into effect? 
Some BBCI programs were announced on a stand-alone basis, but most were announced as 
a part of a package of measures . In some instances, authorities had already provided 
emergency liquidity, account or debt guarantees, or ad hoc capital injections before the BBCI 
program became o perational. Figure 2 lists different combinations of policy measures in 
operation with BBCI programs. 
In 13 of the 36 cases, recapitalization was combined with a government program to purchase 
or guarantee nonperforming loans (NPLs) from those banks. In Sp ain, the purchase or 
guarantee of NPLs came after the recapitalization was in progress. In Hungary, Israel, South 
Korea, and Thailand, governments also enforced banking  sector reform with the 
recapitalization program. Studies of past capital  injection prog rams during the Asian 
Financial Crisis suggest that bank restructuring and impaired -asset purchases are both 
complementary to recapitalization, since the goal of recapitalization is to restore and 
reassure “sustainable cash-based profitability” (Enoch, Garcia, and Sundararajan 2001; Scott 
2002). Brei et al. (2020) conclude that recapitalization is often ineffective without an NPL 
strategy, and vice versa. 
In 2 2 of the cases, recapitalization was combined with a comprehensive government 
guarantee of bank lia bilities. 15 cases combined with debt guarantees, 15 cases combined 
with account guarantees and 8 cases had both. Some believe that the US CPP in 2008–09 did 
not stabilize the financial system alone —only when it was combined with a debt guarantee  
from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was the government able to calm financial 
markets (Jester, Nason, and Norton 2020). 
5
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 2: Other Policy Measures in Operation with BBCI Programs (Chronic Group Programs from Figure 1 Highlighted) 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
BBCI program  Other programs* 
Austria FinStaG (GFC) AP, G (debt) 
Colombia FOGAFÍN capital injection (1999 & 2001) DR, R 
Denmark Capital Injections (GFC) G (already  put in place before recap) (debt and account) 
Finland (Nordic Crisis, 1992) AP, G (debt) 
France SPPE (GFC) G (debt) (refinancing assistance created by private banks supported by government 
guarantee) 
Germany SoFFin (GFC) AP, G (debt) 
Greece (GFC) G (debt), O (liquidity support via government bonds) 
Hong Kong Contingent Bank Capital Facility (GFC) G (debt and account) 
Hungary Bank Recapitalization (1993–94) AP, O (debtor restructuring, financial sector reform) 
Hungary Recapitalization Scheme (GFC) G (debt) 
Indonesia Bank Restructuring Plan (Asian Financial Crisis) AP, DR, R, G (debt and account) 
Ireland Recapitalization Program (GFC) G (debt) 
Israel Bank Shares Arrangement (1983) O (temporary stock market closure, financial sector reform) 
Italy Tremonti bonds (GFC) G (account), O (liquidity support) 
Japan Financial Functions Stabilization Act (February 1998)  AP, G (account), O (tax reduction) 
Japan Prompt Recapitalization Act  
(August 1998) AP, R, G (account) 
Japan Act on Strengthening Financial Functions (2004–21) N 
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans for Major Banks (GFC, 2009) O (stock purchase–market liquidity) 
Korea KDIC (Asian Financial Crisis) AP, DR, R, G (account), O (financial sector reform) 
Korea Bank Recapitalization Fund (GFC, 2008) R, O (market liquidity) 
Malaysia Danamodal (Asian Financial Crisis) AP, DR 
Mexico PROCAPTE (Peso Crisis, 1995) AP, DR, R, G (debt and account) 
Nigeria AMCON (2010) AP 
Norway (Nordic Crisis, 1991) N 
Norway State Finance Fund (GFC) G (account), O (liquidity support, market liquidity) 
Poland 1925 FPIK capitalization (1925)  N 
Russia Bank Capital Support Program (2014) N 
Spain FROB (GFC) (later added to include) AP, R, G (debt and account) 
Sweden Bank Support Authority (1993) G (debt and account) 
Thailand CSF (Asian Financial Crisis) AP, DR, O (financial sector reform) 
Turkey Saving Deposit Insurance Fund (2000) AP, G (account) 
UK Bank Recapitalisation Scheme (GFC) G (debt and account), O (market liquidity) 
US RFC (1933) R, G (debt and account) 
US CPP (GFC, 2008) O (housing, auto, credit market relief), G (debt and account) 
US SCAP/CAP (GFC, 2009) O (market liquidity and consumer, small and medium enterprise (SME) lending) 
US CDCI (GFC, 2010) O (SME lending) 
*AP=asset purchase and other measures to provide relief from nonperforming or legacy assets, DR= debt restructuring, R=resolu tion, G=guarantee (debt and/or account), 
N=none, O=other (description). 
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
There are several reasons why combinations with other interventions—and with guarantees 
in particular—may be more effective than BBCI programs by themselves. First, it may simply 
be that such guarantees are essentially available only to high-income countries (Laeven and 
Valencia 2018). Under this explanation, we may simply be confounding the existence of the 
combination with the resources of the country, where the latter is what matters. 
A similar mechanism, working just through expectations, might be that a combinat ion of 
programs signals to counterparties that the government has many tools available and is 
willing to use them if necessary. In this case, there would be actual efficacy advantages for 
using a combination of programs, but it would require that the gover nment’s signals be 
credible. Such credibility may also vary with national income. 
But a “real” benefit of combinations, independent of national income, is also plausible. Here, 
we recognize that while capital injections are the most direct method to solve an 
undercapitalization problem, BBCI programs require immediate payments to banks and are 
thus both fiscally and politically expensive. A guarantee program, on the other hand, incurs 
only contingent liabilities for the government, and the absence of immedi ate outlays can 
make it politically more palatable. If marginal contributions to different types of programs 
suffer from decreasing returns , it would be  easy to construct simple models where the 
government should optimally spread fiscal and political capital across a variety of programs. 
2. Legal Authority: What was a legal basis that the authorities relied on? Was there a 
need for new law , or could they rely on existing authority? For E uropean Union 
(EU) member countries, what extra European Commission (EC) approval did they 
need? 
In most jurisdictions, government authorities created a new regulatory framework for BBCI 
programs. Out of 36 cases analyzed in this survey, only Japan and South Korea (both in GFC) 
did not require additional legislation for the BBCI program. In Japan, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) 
requested authorization from the minister of finance and prime minister to introduce the 
BBCI framework to provide subordinated loans to banks. In general, the BOJ enjoys wide 
discretion to perform any activity necessary for its mandate, provided it receives 
authorization from the minister of finance and the prime minister. In this case, the BOJ 
requested authorization to extend subordinated loans on the basis of maintai ning stability 
of the financial system. 
In South Korea, authorities relied on the Bank of Korea ’s (BOK’s) authority to provide 
temporary credit to financial institutions in an emergency. The Financial Services 
Commission, with statutory authority on financ ial policy and supervision, established the 
Bank Recapitalization Fund (BRF) to administer and manage capital injections. The BOK 
provided funding for the BRF. However, since it was prohibited under law from directly 
funding the BRF, it instead provided credit to a state-owned development bank based on the 
emergency authority, then this state bank passed the BOK funds through to the BRF. 
The legal framework may (1) set up a new organization or authorize an existing government 
entity to operate and manage the recapitalization, ( 2) appropriate existing funding or raise 
7
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 10 ---
new funding for the program, ( 3) define the terms of any capital subscription , (4) provide 
guidelines for any conditions, and (5) direct how the authorities will exit their holdings. Each 
of these items is discussed in further detail in the appropriate Key Design Decision below. 
Amid a fast-developing crisis, some governments intervene before they have a clear legal 
authority to do so . For examp le, in Sweden’s BBCI, in 1991, the Ministry of Finance began 
injecting capital on an ad hoc basis  without a specific legal framework . It was only in 
December 1992 that the Swedish parliament passed a bill creating the Bank Support 
Authority. 
For some countries, the international legal framework can also be binding. EU member states 
needed the approval of the European Commission for BBCI programs during the GFC. Article 
107(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union prohibits State Aid, which is 
defined as an advantage selectively provided by a national public authority that is likely to 
affect trade between states and may distort competition. 
Article 107(3)(b) of the treaty, however, provides an exception to the general prohibition if 
the aid is in the common interest of EU countries or if it seeks to remedy a “serious 
disturbance” in the economy of an EU country. During the GFC, such disturbances were clear. 
On October 13, 2008, the EC issued guidance to member states on how they could support  
financial markets without excessive distortion to competition (European Commission 
2009b). The guidance allowed for recapitalization of financial institutions that were 
fundamentally sound but might experience distress because of extreme conditions in 
financial markets. Countries could use recapitalization to strengthen the capital base of the 
financial institutions directly or to facilitate the injection of private capital, with the aim of 
preventing negative systemic spillovers (European Commission 2008a). 
Each case of State Aid required prior notification to the EC , and each member state had to 
wait for the EC’s decision before putting the aid measures into effect. Acknowledging the 
urgency of the situation, the EC promised a swift review process upon complete notification 
and a decision within 24 hours and over a weekend, if necessary (European Commission 
2008a). The EC subsequently published principles for designing specific features in 
recapitalization programs , which we further discuss  in the appropriate sections below 
(European Commission 2009b). 
It is worth noting that the EU's Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), adopted 
post-GFC in 2014, allows countries to undertake precautionary recapitalizations of banks 
that are solven t and not failing or likely to fail. Such measures are conditional on final 
approval under EU State Aid rules. 
3. Communications: How did the government communicate the goals of the 
program? Were there any special communication issues? 
This section highlights  some communication practices in BBCI programs. In general, in 
introducing and operating a BBCI program, authorities strive to quickly reinstall confidence 
in the banks and the financial system. It is essential that the public maintain confidence in 
the au thorities themselves. Successful communications are clear about the goals of the 
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
program, send consistent messages, and portray the authorities as competent and decisive.  
In particular, an acute -phase program should speak directly to bank counterparties an d 
emphasize the effect of additional capital on the safety of bank liabilities.  In contrast, a 
chronic-phase program should communicate with the banks themselves and emphasize the  
need to use their capital to lend to households and businesses.  The long-term public 
perception of programs can be driven by expectations from these early communications, so 
it is not helpful to talk about “increasing lending” if there is nothing in the program design to 
incentivize that goal. 
A poorly communicated recapitalization can make a bad situation worse. For example, a long 
lag between the announcement and implementation of a program can erode market 
confidence. Also, if the authorities fail to explain disparate treatments across banks, they may 
risk the perception that they are bailing out those that are politically connected. 
In Indonesia during the Asian Financial Crisis , public confidence in banks eligible for 
recapitalization faltered due to inconsistent communication about the program  from the 
government. In December 1998, markets collapsed when President B.J. Habibie announced 
that he was replacing the recapitalization program with forced mergers. The government 
then changed course for a second time , restoring the recapitalization program, and the 
parliament passed a budget for it in February 1999 (Lindgren et al. 2000, 63). However, two 
days before the expected implementation of the plan in February 1999, the government 
postponed it yet again on the grounds that there was a lack of political consensus around the 
plans for several of the banks. The public reacted negatively to that news. Many believed that 
decisions had been influenced by political favoritism  (Enoch et al. 2001) . When the 
government finally implemented the program on March 13, 1999, it generally reaffirmed the 
terms of its original commitment. Yet, even then, it created uncertainty about its intentions 
by neglecting to “explicitly restate its earlier commitment to leave the day-to-day running of 
the banks in the hands of the owners” (Lindgren et al. 2000, 64). 
4. Governance and Administration: Did the government or the central bank take the 
lead in establishing the BBCI program? Were any private parties involved for 
consultation? Were there requirements to report to a legislative body? Were there 
external or internal audits of the program’s operations? 
In devising governance arrangements, authorities must pay attention to both the operational 
efficiency of the program and to the public perception of its fairness.  There are often many 
reasonable ways to successfully achieve the first goal.  For the second, designers must be 
sensitive to the social and political climate. Is the public blaming specific actors for the crisis? 
How significant are concerns about fairness or corruption if an existing agency is directly 
administering the program?  As with the communication challenges discussed above, there 
are many ways to get this part wrong but no general strategy to get it right. 
Typically, the fiscal authority has taken the lead in establishing and a dministering the 
recapitalization of financial institutions. This is to be expected, as recapitalization entails 
substantial fiscal costs. The central bank has taken the lead in a smaller number of cases. In 
the Indonesian BBCI case of 1999, the new legisl ation on bank restructuring gave Bank 
9
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 12 ---
Indonesia the purview to make temporary capital investments in banks, and based upon this 
legal authority, the Ministry of Finance and Bank Indonesia issued a joint decree outlining 
the recapitalization program. Simila rly, in the German BBCI during the GFC, the Federal 
Agency for Financial Market Stabilization, which managed the program, reported initially to 
Bundesbank but was later assigned to the Ministry of Finance. In the Japanese BBCI case 
during the GFC, called t he Provision of Subordinated Loans for Major Japanese Banks, the 
Bank of Japan obtained an exception from the minister of finance and the prime minister to 
be the sole operator for recapitalizing banks with subordinated loans. 
Even when the fiscal authority takes the lead, central banks and other supervisory and 
regulatory agencies will assist in the operations, often with private  sector experts. For 
example, South Korea’s Bank Recapitalization Fund during the GFC was managed by  a 
committee consisting of nine members representing the bank supervisor, participating 
banks, and institutional investors. Finland in the 1990s commissioned a working group of 
officials and bankers to draft a public report proposing the design of the program. Malaysia’s 
BBCI program in 1998 hired Goldman Sachs and Salomon Smith Barney as independent 
advisers to gauge the overall health of the beneficiaries , to determine the required capital 
amount, and to construct an operational infrastructure. Figure 3 lists the main operators of 
our 36 BBCI programs, highlighting any newly created legal entities.  
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 3: Main Entity Responsible for BBCI Operations 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Country Crisis Institution administrating BBCI  
Austria GFC Special entity (FIMBAG) 
Colombia 1999 & 2001 Special entity (FOGAFÍN) 
Denmark GFC Government 
Finland  Nordic Crisis 1990s Government 
France GFC Special entity (SPPE) 
Germany GFC Special entity (SoFFin) 
Greece GFC Government 
Hong Kong GFC Hong Kong Monetary Authority  
Hungary  1993–94 Government 
Hungary GFC Government 
Indonesia Asian Financial Crisis 
1990s Bank Indonesia and Special Entity (IBRA) 
Ireland GFC Government 
Israel 1983 Government 
Italy GFC Government 
Japan  Asian Financial Crisis 
1990s Government  
Japan Asian Financial Crisis 
1990s Special entity (FRC, RCC) 
Japan 2004–21 Government 
Japan GFC Bank of Japan 
Korea Asian Financial Crisis 
1990s Special entity (KDIC) 
Korea GFC Special entity (Bank Recapitalization Oversight Committee)  
Malaysia Asian Financial Crisis 
1990s Special entity (Danamodal) 
Mexico Peso Crisis 1990s Special entity (FOBAPROA) 
Nigeria 2010 Special entity (AMCON) 
Norway Nordic Crisis 1990s Special entity (GBIF, SBIF) 
Norway  GFC Special entity (SFF) 
Poland 1925 Special entity (FPIK) 
Russia 2014 Special entity (DIA) 
Spain GFC Special entity (FROB) 
Sweden Nordic Crisis 1990s Special entity (BSA) 
Thailand Asian Financial Crisis 
1990s Special entity (Financial Restructuring Advising Committee) 
Turkey  2000 Special entity (BRSA, SDIF) 
UK GFC Special entity (UKFI) 
US Great Depression Special entity (RFC) 
US GFC Government (US Treasury)  
11
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 14 ---
Some experts recommend that the entity operating and managing the BBCI program should 
remain independent, either from supervisors or political forces, while remaining under the 
purview of the government. Sweden’s Bank Support Authority (BSA), created in 1992 for the 
purpose of recapitalizing banks, remained independent from the banks’ supervisors. A 
commenter closely involved in the operations of the authority highlighted its independence, 
stating that this was natural as the supervisors then did not have a ny experience in 
recapitalizing banks. BSA reported the activities of participating institutions to the central 
bank, the financial supervisory authority, and the National Debt Office. In Norway’s BBCI 
program, the parliament created two funds with their o wn boards to handle the acquired 
shares at arm’s length from the government . The purpose of t his setup was to prevent the 
political authorities from micromanaging the banks (Bergo 2003). 
In most cases, the recapitalization operation has been subject to oversight and external audit. 
In France, Ernst & Young performed external audits for  the Société de prise de participation 
de l’État (SPPE) financial statements. In Sweden, the BSA board was subject to audit by the 
National Audit Office, as any other government entities would be. In the US, Congress created 
new oversight committees to keep track of the capital  injection programs during the GFC. 
The Financial Stability Oversight Board, chaired by the chairman of the Federal Reserve 
Board, oversaw the activities of CAP and CPP in the US; the Senate’s Congressional Oversight 
Panel and a special inspector general conducted independent reviews. These forms of 
external review can make the day -to-day operation of the program more burdensome but 
can be useful to improve both the appearance and reality of fair treatment. 
In the case of Japan’s recapitalization in 199 8 under the Prompt Recapitalization Act, 
governance issues in the independent oversight commission caused further uncertainty in 
the market. While the first chair of the committee attempted to enforce stricter behavioral 
terms for banks receiving capital injections, he was removed from the position after less than 
a year and was replaced by a less -resolute chairman by the prime minister. The changes in 
leadership caused volatility in the Japanese market, with shareholders unsure of future 
underwriting terms . As the committee became more banker -friendly under successive 
chairs, efforts to restructure Japanese banks faltered (Spindle and Dvorak 2000). 
5. Size: What was the announced size of the total BBCI program? Did changing 
circumstances lead the authorities to increase it? 
Legislative bodies typically determine the total amount of funds available for 
recapitalization, whether through taxpayer appropriation  or government -bond issuance 
(see Key Design Decision No. 7, Source of Funding). The size of the program may be based on 
a rough estimate of the capital shortfall in the financial sector or simply an expression of 
political feasibility. Decisions on the ov erall size of the program may also be influenced by 
whether the crisis is in an acute or chronic phase. In an acute phase, policymakers may focus 
on deploying a larger and wider -scale capital injection while facing less political resistance 
due to the urge ncy of the situation. In a chronic phase, policymakers are likely to conduct 
more detailed analysis to determine the size of the program. Ultimately, however, the overall 
size of the program is constrained by fiscal space and political realities. 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
In five of the cases we reviewed, the authorities increased the initially announced size of the 
program, determining that the banking sector remained fragile after depleting the initially 
allocated amount. In each of these cases, we label the change with the yellow caution flag. 
If a recapitalization is too small and banks remain unable to meet capital requirements, not 
only will the intervention have limited benefits, but there may also be costs. Banks that 
remain undercapitalized may be more likely to continue lending to zombie firms rather than 
take needed charge-offs (Giannetti and Simonov 2013). They may also seek to achieve capital 
ratio targets by simply reducing their assets (the denominator of the ratio), or “shrinking to 
health,” which doesn’t help them build capital (the numerator) or incentivize them to resume 
lending (Mariathasan and Merrouche 2012) . A study analyzing three capital  injection 
programs in Japan in 1998, 1999, and 200 4 suggests that the size of capital injections and 
banks’ ex -post ability t o meet capital requirements are crucial determinants in the 
effectiveness of recapitalization. The Japanese BBCI program in 1998 under the Financial 
Functions Stabilization Act (FFSA) unilaterally offered JPY100 billion (less than USD1 billion) 
to each of the city banks; considering the real capital needs of the banks, this amount proved 
to be too small (Montgomery and Shimizutani 2009). New legislation establishing the 1999 
program increased the size. 
The Irish recapitalization program during the GFC appropriated a small amount initially and 
then continuously increased the program’s size, which was consistent with the EC guidance 
but created public uncertainty about banks’ financial positions and reduce d confidence in 
the official management of the problem (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020; European 
Commission 2008a). 
Of course, it is difficult to determine how much capital banks will need during the acute stage 
of a crisis, when the value of tradable assets and the likelihood of repayment on outstanding 
credits are uncertain. During the chronic phase, governments have more time and data for 
analysis. The US stress test in 2009 was a particularly rigorous example of analysis in the 
chronic phase of a cr isis. Formal estimates of capital needs may be based on capital ratio 
targets in existing national regulations, international standards, or new targets developed in 
response to the market stress. Malaysia’s central bank in 1998 conducted an industry -wide 
stress test to determine the size of a BBCI program that would keep the risk-weighted capital 
ratio across the banking industry above 9 %. Similarly, Denmark’s central bank in the GFC 
conducted a stress test based on three scenarios 6  for the 15 largest Dani sh banks to 
determine the size of the program. The central bank expected the program would be large 
enough to allow all eligible institutions in Denmark to achieve a 12% Tier 1 capital ratio, the 
 
6 In the first scenario, the financial crisis would lead to a deep i nternational recession, entailing lower demand 
for Danish products; central banks worldwide would adopt a more expansionary monetary  policy stance, and 
interest rates would fall. In the second scenario, the financial crisis would prompt the Danish banks to  
significantly reduce their lending. The third scenario was a combination of the first two scenarios, in which a 
deep international recession would coincide with a credit crunch in Denmark and cause a historic decline in 
economic activity. The stress test accounted for the fact that banks could not pay dividends for two years due 
to the state guarantee issued in October 2008, and assumed that banks would contribute to the guarantee 
scheme. The stress test modeled the pressure on bank earnings and capital ad equacy that would result from 
these scenarios. 
13
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 16 ---
level the central bank decided was enough to increase banks’  ability to raise private capital 
and support the economy. 
In many cases, the size of the program was ultimately constrained by the public resources 
available. When US officials described the CAP as an unlimited capital backstop in 2009, they 
meant simply that they believed the roughly USD300 billion in available funds would be 
sufficient to meet any potential needs (Clark, Kabaker, and Sachs 2020, 270). The size of the 
Polish program in 1925 was constrained by limited fiscal space; for that reason, the program 
prioritized larger banks. 
Ireland’s recapitalization during the GFC ultimately ran into fiscal constraints (Honohan 
2012, 5, 10–11). The government’s support of the country’s largest banks, which included a 
blanket guarantee on bank liabilities, shifted the focal point of the crisis from the soundness 
of banks to the soundness of the government itself. The financial precariousness of the banks 
and the sovereign formed a vicious cycle (Bayoumi 2017, 208; Eichengreen 2014, 356–57). 
6. Timing: Was the program timely? 
Homar and van Wijnbergen  (2017) find that recapitalizing banks early can shorten the 
expected duration of a crisis -related reces sion by two years. In particular, they find that 
timely action in the acute phase of a financial crisis can stem further erosion of banks’ capital 
and lead to a faster recovery and limit damage to the economy. In contrast, Mariathasan and 
Merrouche (2012) conclude that timing did not play any “statistically significant role” in a 
study of recapitalization s’ effects on bank lending in 15 OECD  (Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development) countries. 
As noted in Key Design Decision No. 3, Communications, delays in launching BBCI programs 
can contribute to market confusion and allow banks’ liquidity to deteriorate further. South 
Korea’s National Assembly Budget Office criticized the country’s Bank Recapitalization Fund 
in the GFC for the delay in operations. By the time the voluntary program was in operation, 
most banks had raised Tier 1 capital from the private market. The market then viewed banks 
that participated in the program as weaker because they had been unable to raise funds from 
private inves tors. Conversely, the Malaysian central bank argued that the timely 
establishment of its BBCI program in 1998 contributed to the success of the program in 
resolving banking sector problems and kept the cost of recapitalization low  (Bank Negara 
Malaysia 2004). 
Political factors can create delays. South Korea’s 1998 program required an additional round 
after the initially approved amount was depleted. By early 1999, the Korean government 
recognized the need to raise more public funds to head off any additiona l unforeseen 
complications. Lawmakers convened to discuss the second round of capital injections, but 
the discussion paused and did not pick up until after the national election for lawmakers in 
April 2000. The government did not declare the second round of funds until mid-2000. Some 
scholars suggest that lawmakers had sought to avoid political backlash before the election, 
and that they waited until financial markets became sufficiently turbulent before they 
conceded that banks would require additional public funds (Lim and Hahm 2004, 19). 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
International political factors can accelerate programs. For example, France accelerated the 
announcement of SPPE after the Netherlands announced that it was injecting capital into 
ING, a large Dutch bank. The US announced the CPP shortly after the UK announced its BBCI 
program. Figure 4 lists the timeline for US and European BBCI programs during the GFC, 
showing a cluster of announcements. 
Figure 4: Announcement of BBCI Programs in US and EU Member States during the 
Global Financial Crisis  
BBCI program  Announcement date 
UK (2008) October 8, 2008 
Italy (2008) October 9, 2008 
Germany (2008) October 12, 2008 
US (2008, CPP) October 14, 2008 
Greece (2008) October 15, 2008 
France (2008) October 20, 2008 
Austria (2008) October 26, 2008 
Hungary (2008) November 6, 2008 
Ireland (2008) December 14, 2008 
Denmark (2009) February 3, 2009 
Norway (2009) February 8, 2009 
US (2009, SCAP and CAP) February 10, 2009 
Spain (2009) June 27, 2009 
US (2010, CDCI) February 3, 2010 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
  
15
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 18 ---
7. Source of Funding : Where does the funding come from? Are the authorities 
providing cash or bonds in exchange for the capital? Are there any private funds 
involved? What measures do authorities take to protect the provided funds  and 
allow them to recoup their investments? 
Some funding sources can prove controversial . In the case of the Irish BBCI in the GFC, the 
minister of finance used the National Pension Reserve Fund to recapitalize the banks. 
However, before this pension fund could be used f or this purpose, the National Pension 
Reserve Fund Act had to be amended; this took about three months after the initial 
announcement of the recapitalization plan. The minister of finance raised EUR3 billion by 
pulling forward and redirecting government funding of the pension fund and EUR4 billion 
by liquidating existing assets in the fund, mostly cash reserves and government bonds . In a 
subsequent ad  hoc capital injection, when the government consid ered it unlikely that it 
would recover funds, the Exchequer was used instead of the pension fund (Houses of the 
Oireachtas 2016). However, the fiscal space was ultimately revealed to be limited as the Irish 
government lost reasonable access to the bond market. 
Some authorities obtained funding from the private sector. In Sweden (Nordic Crisis) and 
Hungary (GFC), operational costs were partially funded through mandatory fees paid by the 
participating financial institutions . In Indonesia, current shareholders  were offered 
warrants to purchase additional shares as an incentive to participate. Participating 
shareholders also received Certificates of Entitlement, a tradable instrument on the capital 
market entitling the holder to proceeds of collections and sales  of assets transferred to the 
recapitalizing authority over a specified period . We find this to be an interesting design 
feature with many unexplored mechanics.  By varying the terms of such offers, authorities 
can create strong incentives for current shareholders to invest new capital, with the holdouts 
effectively subsidizing the participants. 
In Thailand, to incentivize private investor participation in the Tier 1 capital injection, the 
government issued and offered three -year covered warrants on the preferred shares of 
banks to participating investors, enabling them to purchase the government’ s shares at the 
original purchase price plus carrying costs (Santiprabhob 2003). 
The government may contribute cash or bonds, either tradable or nontradable. Prior to the 
GFC, bonds were a common source of payment by the government. However, dur ing and 
since the GFC, this has become less prevalent. Russia, Nigeria, and Turkey are the only 
countries that have used government bonds in recent years. Russia paid government bonds 
in its 2014 program in response to international sanctions, Nigeria’s AM CON in 2010 paid 
banks in zero -coupon bonds guaranteed by the government, and Turkey’s Saving Deposit 
Insurance Fund ( SDIF) in 2000 paid the banks in treasury securities with floating rates 
linked to borrowing costs and foreign exchange–linked bonds. 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 5: Source of Funding for Capital Injection 
BBCI program  Funding source* 
Austria FinStaG (GFC) NAP 
Colombia: FOGAFÍN capital injection (1999 & 2001) GB, O (deposit insurance fund) 
Denmark Capital Injections (GFC) E-CB 
Finland (Nordic Crisis, 1992) NAP 
France SPPE (GFC) GB 
Germany SoFFin (GFC) E-FM 
Greece (GFC) GB, IFI, F 
Hong Kong (GFC) E-O (foreign exchange fund) 
Hungary Bank Recapitalization (1993–94) GB, IFI 
Hungary Recapitalization Scheme (GFC) IFI (IMF, ECB) 
Indonesia Bank Restructuring Plan of 1999 (Asian Financial Crisis) GB 
Ireland Recapitalization Program (GFC) E-O (National Pension Reserve Fund) 
Israel Bank Shares Arrangement (1983) GB 
Italy Tremonti bonds (GFC) GB 
Japan Financial Functions Stabilization Act (February 1998)  GB 
Japan Prompt Recapitalization Act (August 1998) GB 
Japan Act on Strengthening Financial Functions (2004–21) E-CB, O (Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan) 
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans for Major Banks (GFC, 2009) E-CB 
Korea KDIC (Asian Financial Crisis, 1997) GB 
Korea Bank Recapitalization Fund (GFC, 2008) GB, NAP 
Malaysia Danamodal (Asian Financial Crisis, 1998) GB 
Mexico PROCAPTE (Peso Crisis, 1995) GB, IFI, F 
Nigeria AMCON (2010) GB 
Norway (Nordic Crisis, 1991) NAP 
Norway (GFC) NAP 
Poland 1925 FPIK capitalization (1925)  F, O (seigniorage) 
Russia Bank Capital Support Program (2014) GB 
Spain FROB (GFC) NAP, O (Deposit Guarantee Funds) 
Sweden Bank Support Authority (1993) NAP, O  
Thailand CSF (Asian Financial Crisis, 1998) GB 
Turkey Saving Deposit Insurance Fund (2000) E-FM 
UK Bank Recapitalisation Scheme (GFC) GB 
US RFC (1933) GB 
US CPP (GFC, 2008) NAP 
US SCAP/CAP (GFC, 2009) NAP 
US CDCI (GFC, 2010) NAP 
*E=existing, FM=finance ministry, CB=central bank, GB=newly issued government bonds, NAP=newly appropriated government funds,  IFI=loans 
from international institutions, F=loans from foreign country, O=Others  
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
17
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 20 ---
8. Eligible Institutions: Which institutions are eligible for assistance? Only banks? 
Only domestic? Only potentially viable ones? Under what conditions do 
governments make participation mandatory? 
Types of Financial Institution 
Generally, commercial banks and other depository institutions, such as savings banks and 
credit unions, are eligible for assistance in BBCI programs. However, recapitalization may 
also be extended to other financial institutions, depending on th eir roles in the economy. 
Most programs we surveyed, except those in Japan (1998) and Spain (GFC), were limited to 
domestic financial institutions. In the case of Japan, foreign banks were eligible but did not 
participate. In Spain, financial holding compa nies based in other European Union member 
states were eligible under some conditions. Figure 6 lists eligible institutions for BBCI 
programs in our database.  The figure shows that most acute -phase programs focus on 
traditional banks, with broader eligibility more common in chronic-phase programs.
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 6: Eligible Types of Institution ((Chronic Group Programs from Figure 1 Highlighted)) 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
 
BBCI program  Eligible institutions—only banks? If not, what other institutions? (Y/N)  
Austria FinStaG (GFC) Y 
Colombia: FOGAFÍN capital injection (1999 & 2001) N (later extended to credit institutions specialized in mortgage lending) 
Denmark Capital Injections (GFC) Y 
Finland (Nordic Crisis, 1992) Y 
France SPPE (GFC) N (all credit institutions) 
Germany SoFFin (GFC) N (insurance companies and pension funds) 
Greece (GFC) Y 
Hong Kong (GFC) Y 
Hungary Bank Recapitalization (1993-94) Y 
Hungary Recapitalization Scheme (GFC) Y 
Indonesia Bank Restructuring Plan of 1999 (Asian Financial Crisis)  Y 
Ireland Recapitalization Program (GFC) Y 
Israel Bank Shares Arrangement (1983) Y 
Italy Tremonti bonds (GFC) Y 
Japan Financial Functions Stabilization Act  
(February 1998)  
N (all domestic/foreign banks, credit cooperatives, credit unions, and cooperatives —a 
type of nonbank financial institutions) 
Japan Prompt Recapitalization Act (August 1998) N (three nonbanks listed explicitly in the law) 
Japan Act on Strengthening Financial Functions (2004–21) Y 
Japan Provision of Subordinated Loans for Major Banks (GFC, 2009)  Y 
Korea KDIC (Asian Financial Crisis, 1997) Y 
Korea Bank Recapitalization Fund (GFC, 2008) Y 
Malaysia Danamodal (Asian Financial Crisis, 1998) N (finance companies) 
Mexico PROCAPTE (Peso Crisis, 1995) Y 
Nigeria AMCON (2010) Y 
Norway (Nordic Crisis, 1991) Y 
Norway State Finance Fund (GFC) Y 
Poland 1925 FPIK capitalization (1925)  Y 
Russia Bank Capital Support Program (2014) Y 
Spain FROB (GFC) N (credit institutions including investment companies, etc.) 
Sweden Bank Support Authority (1993) N (credit institutions owned by banks, government-affiliated credit institution) 
Thailand CSF (Asian Financial Crisis, 1998) N (finance and securities companies) 
Turkey Saving Deposit Insurance Fund (2000) Y 
UK Bank Recapitalisation Scheme (GFC) Y 
US RFC (1933) N (insurance companies, mortgage loan companies, national mortgage association)  
US CPP (GFC, 2008) N (S-corporations, mutual banks) 
US SCAP/CAP (GFC, 2009) Y 
US CDCI (GFC, 2010) N (credit unions, community development financial institutions)  
19
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 22 ---
Triage for Solvency/Viability 
Most jurisdictions use solvency or viability tests as a condition of participation. For this 
purpose, solvency tests can be based on some combination of regulatory and market 
measures, both of which may be unreliable in the midst of a crisis. “Viability” is an even looser 
concept, combining notions of solvency with a judgme nt about the potential for the bank 
business to be sustainable long-term. Detailed triage may not be feasible in the acute phase 
of a crisis, leading some countries to offer wider availability. This can be both necessary and 
expedient. For example, Finland in 1992, suffering the deepest recession among the three 
Nordic countries, offered recapitalization to banks regardless of their solvency. The US CPP, 
during the acute phase of the Global Financial Crisis, broadly offered to purchase preferred 
shares in b anks of all sizes on a voluntary basis in late 2008. Regulators reviewed banks’ 
applications for CPP funds and approved banks that met simple criteria based on 
supervisory ratings and financial ratios. Later, during a more chronic phase of the crisis in 
early 2009, the US innovated the use of scenario -based stress testing to identify the capital 
needs of systemically important banks in the US CAP. Triaging to identify banks that still 
needed capital in the chronic phase came after the initial BBCI programs in the acute phase. 
(Claessens et al. 2014) 
Some pre-GFC cases demonstrate the danger of attempting too much triage during the acute 
phase. The Thai program attracted some criticism for disproportionately focus ing on 
identifying potentially viable institutions . Initially, the Thai government and subsequently 
the Thai central bank attempted to identify  solvent and insolvent institutions. However, 
Santiprabhob (2003) comments that this careful exercise meant that aut horities paid too 
little attention to asset deterioration and nonperforming loan restructuring. Similarly, in 
Indonesia, triage delayed the operation of  the BBCI program , where the government 
announced a blanket guarantee in January 1998, began examination s in August 1998, but 
did not implement recapitalizations until March 1999. 
Triage is more feasible  in the chronic phase . Here, policymakers can carefully assess 
individual financial institutions, both to avoid wasting funds on nonviable banks and to make 
sure that the injections are correctly sized for the viable ones. Disregarding an institution’s 
needs can easily result in an ineffective recapitalization. Japan’s program under the FFSA in 
1998 injected JPY100 billion into every city bank to avoid immediately revealing the 
weakness of any one bank through the assisted a mount (Montgomery and Shimizutani 
2009). No attempt was made to discern whether this amount would be enough to 
recapitalize each bank , and the amount was set unrelated to risk profile or level of 
undercapitalization (Allen, Chakraborty, and Watanabe 2009). The government determined 
the JPY100 billion figure because that was the most the government could get the Bank of 
Tokyo Mitsubishi, the healthiest bank at that time, to accept  (Montgomery and Shimizutani 
2009). It proved insufficient to properly recapita lize the other major banks, which had 
greater capital needs than the Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi. 
20
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 23 ---
Authorities sometimes use external experts to assist in th e viability assessment. Sweden’s 
BBCI program, announced in 1992, hired international consultants to an alyze the banks’ 
credit portfolios and future viability before deciding to perform capital injections  (Englund 
2015). Similarly, Malaysia’s BBCI program in 1998 hired two US investment banks, Goldman 
Sachs and Salomon Smith Barney, to determine the viability of banks and identify those very 
likely to experience solvency issues by conducting comprehensive individual assessments 
and industry-wide stress tests. 
The data and methodology of stress testing have advanced significantly since the GFC, which 
means that crisis triage techniques used in the past may be outdated.  Some central banks 
may now have the data and skills to perform a credible stress test in the short timeframe 
required during the acute phase of a crisis. But a timeless lesson is that, in the ac ute stage, 
capital injections will not achieve their goal of calming bank counterparties if the size and 
features of the program are based on a non-credible test. 
Mandatory Participation 
Participation was voluntary in most of the programs that we studied. Exceptions included 
Hungary (1993 –94) and Korea ( Asian Financial Crisis ). Mexico’s PROCAPTE made the 
participation voluntary for banks with capital adequacy ratios of 8% or above; for banks 
below that level, the authorities could either mandate recapitalization or suspend their 
banking charter. 
In the cases of the US CAP and Mal aysian Danamodal, authorities used stress tests to 
determine the amount of capital that banks needed; if they were unable to raise the capital 
from private sources, their participation in the official recapitalization became mandatory.  
Some jurisdictions m ade coordinated efforts to minimize the stigma and to ensure wide 
participation in programs that they described as voluntary. France’s SPPE coordinated with 
the six main French banking groups, then representing 80% of France’s net banking income, 
to partic ipate in the capital injection simultaneously  (European Commission 2008b; Woll 
2014). Similarly, in the US CPP, the Treasury secretary and other high -level government 
officials arranged a meeting with the heads of nine of the largest US banks, holding abou t 
55% of all US banking assets at that time. The bankers agreed to participate in CPP “to signal 
the program’s importance to the stability of the financial system” (US Government 
Accountability Office 2012, 7) . The nine banks were selected because governme nt officials 
viewed them as systemically important due to their size, scope of business, and 
interconnectedness in the broader economy (Office of the Special Inspector General for the 
Troubled Asset Relief Program 2009, 14 –15). The government believed that  having the 
institutions all take the capital would mitigate stigmatization by avoiding the appearance 
that institutions that took the capital were weak. 
Landier and Ueda (2009), however, caution that compulsory programs targeting a set of 
banks may require specific changes in the legislation for some jurisdictions , which may not 
be feasible when systemic risk is imminent.  Nevertheless, ensuring wide participation may 
be crucial in the acute phase of a crisis. 
21
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 24 ---
Raising Private Capital 
Some BBCI programs required banks to raise private capital before the government capital 
assistance came in. For example, Mexico’s PROCAPTE denied participation of a bank that was 
unable to raise new capital from the existing shareholders (Mackey 1999, 191). Similarly, for 
private bank recapitalization in Colombia in 1999 and 2001, authorities required current 
shareholders to contribute. 
Indonesia’s BBCI program in 1999 required private banks to raise 20 % of the capital 
required for the bank to reach a capital adequacy ratio of 4 % in cash from the shareholders 
before the government provided capital assistance. 
In others, the authorities did not require but incentivized the participating banks to raise 
private capital first through existing or new shareholders. The UK  Bank Recapitalisation 
Scheme required institutions that chose to issue ordinary shares to first offer to sell 
additional shares to existing shareholders; the government act ed as the underwriter of any 
of these offers. However, the UK BBCI did not require shareholders to take the offer, unlike 
Mexico and Indonesia. The UK government purchase d any shares that were not purchased 
by existing shareholders at  the “maximum permitted discount of 10% to the share price” 
(Kroes 2008). 
US CAP, similarly, allowed six months after the stress test in 2009 for banks to raise new 
capital from private sources . After that, the government acquire d new shares to meet any 
shortfalls. Crucially, the CAP did not allow banks to meet the Federal Reserve’s capital ratio 
target by shrinking their assets (denominator of capital ratio). Instead, the program required 
that any shortfall be met by raising new capital (numerator of the ratio). This is an important 
mechanism for a chronic phase, preventing a perverse incentive to shrink the balance sheet 
by reducing lending. 
In Thailand, the government injected Tier 1 capital to meet a capital adequacy ratio of 2.5%. 
Beyond this level, the government injected Tier 1 capital only if it was matched by private 
capital injections of equal or greater value . This enabled the government to rely on the due 
diligence of private investors to determine the level of Tier 1 capital contributions. The 
private capital could come fro m both new and existing shareholders (Lindgren et al. 2000, 
100). 
Other Efforts to Incentivize Participation 
Subsequent policy measures may encourage banks to participate in a voluntary 
recapitalization program, if the measure is attractive enough for banks. For example, the US 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) during the Great Depression faced early 
hesitancy from banks  (Jones 1951, 26) . Participation increased when the government 
emphasized that only sound and solvent banks would be eligible for the new federal deposit 
insurance program that would come into effect at the beginning of 1934 (Banking Act of 
1933, 11). By the end of 1933, t he RFC had disbursed about USD264 million in preferred 
share aid, compared to USD63 million at the end of the third quarter (U. S. Department of the 
Treasury 1959, 27). 
22
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 25 ---
9. Individual Participation Limits : Are there any limits to how much assistance an 
individual participant can receive from the intervention? 
Individual capital injection amounts were often unlimited but, in some cases, tailored to the 
size of individual financial institutions. Most commonly, these limits were calculated against 
risk-weighted assets. US CPP set forth both a maximum—the lesser of USD25 billion and 3% 
of risk-weighted assets—and a minimum of 1% of risk-weighted assets. South Korea’s Bank 
Recapitalization Fund (GFC) used asset holdings in calculating individual caps, rejecting the 
use of credit ratings because of stigma concerns (Lee and Rhee 2012). Russia’s 2014 program 
limited capital injections to no more than 25% of the bank’s capital. 
Some programs further tailored the size of capital injections to the needs of individual 
institutions. The UK Bank Recapitalisation Scheme depended on calculations using a variety 
of bank-specific stress tests, aimed at substantiating private market confidence in the bank 
and ensuring enough loss absorption in the case of a recession or tightened banking 
conditions. 
Similarly, Denmark limited the recapitalization of participating institutions up to a Tier 1 
capital ratio of 12%. The Danish National Bank decided on that target after a stress test based 
on three scenarios for the 15 largest Danish banks. The central bank concluded the target 
12% should increase banks’ ability to get private capital market funding and support the real 
economy (European Commission 2009a). 
10. Capital Characteristics: What form of capital is injected? 
Figure 7 summarizes the main structures used in our 36 cases. Overall, 19 programs used 
subordinated debt, 23 used preferred shares, and 11 used common shares. In 22 cases, two 
or more types of capital were offered. In 1 4 cases, preferred shares or subordinated debt 
were convertible into common shares. In four cases, Ireland, US CPP and CAP during the GFC 
and Thailand during the Asian Financial Crisis, those holdings came with warrants to buy 
common shares.
23
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 26 ---
Figure 7: Capital Characteristics and Phase of Crises 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Acute phase Chronic phase 
Programs Capital characteristics* Voting or nonvoting** Programs Capital characteristics* Voting or nonvoting** 
Austria FinStaG (GFC)  O (participation capital) NVT Colombia FOGAFÍN capital 
injection (1999 & 2001) 
SD, O (loans to shareholders) DK 
France SPPE (GFC) SD, P (later added) NVT Denmark Capital Injections 
(GFC) 
SD (convertibility added later) NVT 
Germany SoFFin (GFC) SD (silent participation), 
C (later added) 
NVT (SD), 
VT (C) 
Finland (Nordic Crisis, 1992) CP (government had the right) NVT 
Greece (GFC) CP DK Hungary Bank Recapitalization 
(1993–94) 
C, SD VT (C), 
NVT (SD) 
Hong Kong Contingent Bank 
Capital Facility (GFC) 
DK DK Japan Financial Functions 
Stabilization Act (February 
1998) 
CP, SD DK 
Hungary Recapitalization 
Scheme (GFC) 
P NVT Japan Prompt Recapitalization 
Act (August 1998) 
  
MCP, SD  DK 
Indonesia Bank 
Restructuring Plan of 1999 
(Asian Financial Crisis) 
C, CP (but not used) VT Japan Act on Strengthening 
Financial Functions (2004-21) 
C, CP, SD, O (beneficial rights, 
preferred investments) 
NVT (unless in three 
circumstances) 
Ireland Recapitalization 
Program (GFC) 
P VT (but limited) Japan Provision of Subordinated 
Loans for Major Banks (GFC) 
SD DK 
Israel Bank Shares 
Arrangement (1983) 
O (purchasing 
shareholder's shares) 
NVT Korea Bank Recapitalization 
Fund (GFC) 
P, SD NVT 
Italy Tremonti bonds (GFC) CD  DK Malaysia Danamodal (Asian 
Financial Crisis) 
C, CD  VT 
Korea KDIC (Asian 
Financial Crisis) 
C, P, SD DK Nigeria AMCON (2010) C, P DK 
Mexico PROCAPTE 1995 
(Peso Crisis) 
CD DK Norway (Nordic Crisis, 1991) C, P, CD, O (primary capital 
certificate) 
VT, NVT 
Poland 1925 FPIK 
capitalization (1925) 
DK DK Norway State Finance Fund 
(GFC) 
P, O (fund bonds) NVT 
Russia Bank Capital 
Support Program (2014) 
P, SD NVT Spain FROB (GFC) CP, C (later added), CD (later 
added) 
VT 
Thailand CSF 1998 (Asian 
Financial Crisis) 
P, SD VT (just for P) Sweden Bank Support Authority 
(1993) 
C, CP (authority had the right to 
convert) 
V, NVT 
UK Bank Recapitalisation 
Scheme (GFC) 
C, P VT (C), NVT (P) Turkey Saving Deposit 
Insurance Fund (2000) 
O (already SDIF-controlled banks) DK 
US RFC (1933) P, SD VT US SCAP and CAP (GFC) MCP NVT 
US CPP (GFC) P, SD NVT US CDCI (GFC) P, SD NVT (unless excessive non-
repayment) 
*C=common, MCP= mandatorily convertible preferred, CP=convertible preferred, P=preferred, CD=convertible debt, SD=subordinated debt, O=other (specify) 
**VT=voting, NVT=nonvoting, DK=do not know 
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 27 ---
The wide variety of structures is driven by the variety of goals. Designers use security choice 
and shareholder rights to incentivize participation by the “right” institutions, to reduce 
moral hazard in participating institutions, to facilitate the eventual exit of government 
investment, and sometimes just to get around legal restrictions for existing share classes.  
There is no one -size-fits-all path to achieving these goals.  Nevertheless, a few patterns 
emerge and allow for some general guidance.  We discuss some of this guidance below, and 
then again in the conclusion section of this paper. 
(a) Bearing losses and voting rights  can be separated.  The label on the security 
(common, preferred, debt) does not necessarily imply specific control rights. 
Governments of capitalist economies are naturally reluctant to take voting rights in banks.  
This reluctance spills over to an avoidance of common share, since common shareholders 
typically have voting rights but are last in the cash  flow waterfall after debtholders and 
preferred shareholders. But while this pairing of voti ng rights with the willingness to bear 
losses is standard, it is absolutely not required.  Conversely, preferred share, subordinated 
debt, and any other cash  flow claim can also be structured to include voting rights.  Overall, 
there is no reason to let conc erns about voting or control have any influence over the cash  
flow claims and capital priority embedded in the security choice. 
In the US CPP, the authorities pledged not to use the voting power given to them by the 
common equity obtained through conversio n. In contrast, in the US RFC during the Great 
Depression, although assistance was through preferred shares, the authorities required 
substantial voting rights. Thailand’s BBCI program also subscribed to preferred shares with 
voting rights. Ireland’s BBCI program during the Global Financial Crisis used preferred 
shares with 25 % of the banks’ voting rights on issues of change of control and board 
appointments. In Hungary, the assistance was through nonvoting preferred shares, but the 
government received a special veto right as a safeguard. 
(b) In an acute phase, simpler is better. 
Mariathasan and Merrouche (2012) find that, after analyzing data from public interventions 
in 2008–09, common shares, not preferred shares, corresponded to increased bank lending 
and larger regulatory capital buffers. 
Denmark’s BBCI program during the GFC started with perpetual subordinated debt, but the 
authorities later added a convertibility option for participating banks. This was to enhance 
the loss-bearing quality of the capital that participating banks issued under the program. 
Investors and rating agencies did not consider the initially issued subordinated debt to be 
sufficiently loss-bearing, a critical feature for inclusion as core Tier 1 capital. 
Indonesia’s BBCI program, whi ch was in an acute phase, favored common shares over 
preferred shares and eventually subscribed only to common shares. During the GFC, 
Germany and Spain’s BBCI programs exclusively used subordinated debt and preferred 
shares, respectively, but when these injections were proven to be insufficient, the authorities 
extended the programs to include common shares. 
25
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 28 ---
The Italian government in its BBCI program during the Global Financial Crisis acquired 
special bonds known as “Tremonti bonds” from banks. The Tremont i bonds were designed 
to qualify as core Tier 1 capital. Interest was noncumulative and only paid if there were 
distributable earnings, provided the total capital ratio was at least 8 %. They had the same 
degree of subordination and same ability to absorb l osses as a common share in case of 
insolvency or when losses reduced the capital ratio below 8 %. A representative from the 
Bank of Italy, however, in discussing the features of Tremonti bonds, agreed that, in principle, 
instruments with standard, noncomplex features would be preferable for capital injections, 
as they would allow for greater comparability, pricing, and clearer loss -absorption 
mechanisms. 
These examples all point toward using simple structures in the acute phase. In many 
countries, the simplest option would be common shares. But it is also possible that preferred 
shares could be considered simple enough to execute in the acute phase, especially if banks 
already have outstanding preferred shares that they issued in normal times. In the post-GFC 
regulatory environment, many countries have adopted preferred shares as part of their 
capital buffers. It also may be simpler to issue preferred stock if negotiations with existing 
common shareholders about pricing would complicate the issuance of common shares. 
(c) In a chronic phase, creative security design can alleviate incentive problems.  
Convertible preferred shares warrants with time -varying strike prices and other 
features should all be considered  but must be tailored to the specific goals of the 
program. 
As Quintyn  and Hoelscher  (2003) and Philippon and Schnabl (2013) recommend, other 
features attached to the basic forms of capital can enhance the quality of capital. For example, 
subordinated debt or preferred shares may not provide a strong enough capital support for 
a faltering bank; adding convertibility or warrants can lower the probability of default. 
Moreover, the capital base would become even stronger if the exercise of conversion is 
mandatory and automatic rather than at the discretion of the holder or the issuer  (Landier 
and Ueda 2009). 
In the Denmark BBCI program, the authorities added a conversion option to the 
subordinated debt in the hope of ensuring that participating banks could maximize t he use 
of capital injections for external-rating purposes while minimizing changes to the authorized 
original plan (European Commission 2009a) . The conversion option was available for five 
years after issuance. By converting, banks could avoid step-up provisions related to interest 
rates and reimbursement prices. This gave banks an incentive to convert their debt into 
ordinary shares to avoid higher payments  (European Commission 2009a) . The conversion 
price included a 5 % discount to the average share price derived over three working days 
from the conversion date, limiting the ability of issuers to use the conversion option to 
entirely avoid the step-up clauses. For the conversion option, banks had to pay an additional 
annual fee of 20  basis points ( bps) to 6 0 bps, as per European Central Bank 
recommendations, to align it with the range of remuneration set up for ordinary shares. The 
EC verified appropriate fee levels of convertible hybrid capital on a case -by-case basis. The 
EC considered these conditions app ropriate to safeguard the use of the capital injections 
26
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 29 ---
scheme and to avoid undue distortions of competition, as required by the State Aid policy  
(European Commission 2009a). 
Convertibility can also be used to direct banks’ behavior. The Irish BBCI incorporated a 
conversion exercisable by the government if the participating banks missed dividend 
payments. Finland’s 1992 BBCI took the form of noncumulative convertible preferred 
shares. The government had the right to convert them to common shares if interest remained 
unpaid for three consecutive years or if a bank’s solvency ratio fell below the legal minimum. 
The government viewed the three -year target as “enough time for the ba nks to put their 
houses in order” (Kuusterä and Tarkka 2011, 671–74). However, as none of the shares were 
converted and the interest rate was set only slightly above the market rate, some argue that 
this form of capital support represented a subsidy for th e existing shareholders (Moe, 
Solheim, and Vale 2004). 
There were four interventions with warrants attached in our survey. Warrants gave 
authorities the right to purchase shares in the future at a set price, and thus had the political 
appeal in allowing th e taxpayers to share the potential upside of recipient institutions 
(Calomiris and Khan 2015) . Philippon and Schnabl (2013) claim preferred shares with 
standard warrants outperform common shares in eliminating free-riding and opportunistic 
participation. They find that preferred shares with standard warrants minimize ex -post 
private information rents to banks and minimize ex -ante moral hazard conditional on any 
given likelihood of government intervention. However, in an acute phase of a financial crisis, 
using warrants for this purpose may not be the most efficient choice for  stabilizing the 
financial system quickly. The US CPP and CAP had 10 -year warrants, which were 
immediately exercisable, attached to the preferred shares . This allowed the government to 
purchase common shares of publicly traded banks equal to a certain percentage of preferred 
shares issued on the day of the initial investment. 
In Ireland, the preferred shares came with warrants giving the government the right to 
purchase 25% of the common shares of each bank after five years. The strike prices for these 
warrants were in each bank’s case less than 1  euro. A bank could reduce the government’s 
rights under the warrant to as low as 15 % of the common shares if the bank redeemed the 
preferred shares up to EUR1.5 billion by the end of 2009. This tranche of warrants that the 
banks could eliminate had a materially lower strike price than the rest of the warrants, 
aiming to encourage banks to expediently replace government capital with new private 
capital (European Commission 2009d, 7; European Commission 2009e, 7). The government 
could not vote more than half of the votes associated with any shares it received through 
exercise of the warrant, but if these shares were transferred to a nongovernment third party, 
full voting privileges became reinstated (Department of Finance 2009). US CPP had a similar 
voting restriction on common shares acquired by the exercise of warrants. 
Some cases used forms of capital that diverge further from these standard forms. In Austria, 
the form of capital issued under the BBCI program was participation capital, largely shaped 
by banks. This was introduced in Austria 30 years before the crisis and does not grant the 
government any position or membership rights under stock corporation law, giving the 
government no direct influence over the beneficiary institution. According to Kalss  (2010), 
27
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 30 ---
the preference for participation capital stemmed from the banks’ influence on the writing of 
the Financial Market Stability Act, which the recapitalization relied upon, and their input 
during individual negotiations for institutional recapitalization. 
(d) Be careful about corporate charters and existing shareholder/creditor rights. 
For issuance of new shares and the conversion to a nd exercise of warrants for common 
shares to operate smoothly and timely, authorities need to ensure certain requirements are 
met for banks to have enough available authorized shares. In Indonesia, the authorities faced 
delays due to its capital regulation , requiring a preemptive rights issue for new issuance of 
shares to protect existing shareholders . Spain’s BBCI program during the Global Financial 
Crisis and beyond required participating banks to cancel preemptive subscription rights of 
existing shareholders. In the US CAP and CPP, the authorities recommended and incentivized 
the banks to go through the process of increasing the number of authorized shares earlier 
than later in preparation for a smooth convertibility when the warrants were exercised. 
In the US CAP, to incentivize banks to solve shareholder rights issues in a timely fashion, the 
strike price on the warrants was reduced by 15 % every six months if banks did not obtain 
preemptive shareholder consent to increase the number of authorized shares. 
11. Interest Rates and Dividends (Pricing ): Should they be uniform or risk  adjusted? 
Generous or punitive? 
Authorities have two main decisions to make in pricing BBCI programs. First, will the rates 
be uniform for all participants or calibrated to the riskiness or size of each bank? Second, will 
the rates be relatively generous to incentivize participation or relatively high to encourage 
banks to find funding elsewhere? The goal of a BBCI program will largely shape the decisions. 
For example, if the crisis is in an acute phase and the goal is to intervene fast to stem panic, 
the pricing structure may be uniform and more generous. On the other hand, if the crisis has 
calmed and entered a chronic phase, in which the main goal is to stimulate bank lending, 
then the pricing structure may be more tailored and less generous. 
Uniform or Risk Adjusted? 
Greece, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the UK, and the US imposed a flat, uniform rate for all 
participating financial institutions. 
In other cases, dividend and interes t rates varied depending on the riskiness of the 
investment. For example, in France, the interest rate for subordinated debt was cheaper than 
for preferred shares, reflecting a greater degree of subordination and risk for the authorities. 
In Japan (1998), Austria (GFC) , and Denmark (GFC), interest rates and dividends varied 
depending on the health of the bank. In South Korea’s 200 8 BBCI program, national banks 
had lower interest rates than regional banks. 
28
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 31 ---
Generous or Punitive? 
Interest rates and dividend ra tes were often set above market rates. Finland had a variable 
interest rate set slightly above market rate. 
Denmark, France, Italy, Japan, the UK, and the US adopted step-up clauses after a set number 
of years had passed from issuance to incentivize banks to repay and exit the program as soon 
as market conditions improved. In the Japanese program during the GFC, the interest rate 
was determined through auction. Under the Provision of Subordinated Loans for Major 
Japanese Banks in the global financial crisis , BOJ allowed for the amount of each loan and 
interest rates for the first five years on the 10-year and perpetual loans to be determined at 
auctions using a premium over the six-month yen LIBOR. The interest rate rose by 1.5% after 
five years to penalize banks that did not exit. The US CPP required preferred shares to pay a 
5% annual dividend for the first five years —as an incentive to participate in the voluntary 
program—and a flat 9% after, as an incentive to exit. 
A country may attract some criticism if it sets a more punitive dividend rate compared to 
BBCI programs that other countries establish at the same time, especially if both 
jurisdictions share the same financial institutions and similar financial markets. I n the UK 
Bank Recapitalisation Scheme, ordinary shares were issued at a discount to the reference 
market price, while preferred shares paid a 12% annual dividend for the first five years and 
three-month Libor plus 700 bps thereafter. The high cost to banks  in a program that was 
entirely voluntary ensured that the UK program carried a stigma (Culpepper and Reinke 
2014). Culpepper and Reinke (2014) argue that the high costs attached to recapitalization 
were more of a drawback to participation, rather than beneficial to taxpayers. 
Going into the Global Financial Crisis, the European Commission’s State  Aid rules followed 
the principle that recapitalizations should minimize the amount of State Aid. Such a principle 
would suggest charging relatively high intere st and dividend payments in BBCI programs. 
Nonetheless, the EC recognized that high rates would discourage banks from participating 
in recapitalizations. The EC intended to adjust to long -term market conditions and not to 
impose unfavorable conditions at t he time of the crisis. For these reasons, the EC approved 
dividend rates reflecting market -based remuneration between 6 % and 9.3%, according to 
the degree of subordination. Individual member states had room to adjust the EC guideline 
for two reasons: (1) to incentivize early repayment, so as to reduce taxpayers’ exposure; and 
(2) to avoid excessive recourse to the program, without being excessively penalizing 
(Panetta et al. 2009). 
In Italy, authorities revised the interest rate and the redemption price to encourage 
participation by sound banks. The initial option consisted of lower coupon payments and 
higher redemption prices for five years; later, the authorities added the option of a higher 
initial coupon and lower redemption price. EC Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes said 
that “[t]he Italian authorities have asked permission to modify the design of their scheme to 
make it more attractive to sound banks that are willing to use the state capital only for a very 
short period of time” (European Commission 2009c). However, this feature —emphasizing 
29
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 32 ---
the usage for only a short period of time—may no longer allow this form of capital to qualify 
as Tier 1 under the new regulatory framework applied to all EU member countries in 2014. 
12. Allocation of losses for existing stakeholders: Were there any write-downs of the 
value for existing equity? 
Several BBCI programs require banks to write down the value of nonperforming or 
depreciated assets before the government will buy shares, forcing e xisting shareholders to 
bear losses first. This is typically a feature of a capital injection that is mandatory, rather than 
voluntary. 
South Korea’s 1997 BBCI program—which was mandatory, and during the acute phase of a 
crisis—enabled the authorities to o rder capital write -downs for existing shareholders. 
Colombia’s BBCI program required participating banks to write off their nonperforming 
loans in such a way that it reasonably reflected their true economic value. If after the write -
offs, the bank’s equity  was negative, its shareholders had to capitalize the institution with 
their own resources to bring equity to at least zero. 
Similarly, in Malaysia—which was mandatory for banks that were unable to raise funds from 
private investors—existing shareholders bore all losses prior to recapitalization  under the 
“first-loss” principle . In practice, the application of this principle required banks to mark 
down the value of investments and sell their NPLs to the asset management authorities. This 
resulted in “equita ble burden sharing” for existing shareholders and reduced the use of 
public funds  (Bank Negara Malaysia 199 9, 20) . The central bank argued that strict 
observance to the “first -loss” principle successfully minimized the total cost of 
recapitalization (Bank Negara Malaysia 2004, 108). 
Norway’s BBCI program in 1991 required banks to write down the equity value, forcing 
existing shareholders to absorb losses before the government made direct capital 
investments in the banks . If a bank refused to do so, the gove rnment was entitled to write 
down its share capital. There is some disagreement as to whether this strategy was helpful , 
with Bergo (2003) highlighting the valuable political benefits of imposing losses on current 
shareholders, and Moe, Solheim, and Vale (2004) claiming that the specific write -down 
decisions seemed arbitrary for some banks and thus reduced confidence in the program. 
In Thailand’s 1998 program, banks receiving Tier 1 capital were required to write down the 
equity value, forcing losses on existing shareholders, and to allow the government to change 
management and boards of directors . These relatively punitive terms have split op inion in 
the typical fashion. Some commentators argue that such punitive terms in a voluntary 
program reduced participation and delayed the recapitalization of the sector (World Bank 
2000). Others applaud the incentives created to raise capital privately s o as to avoid the 
punitive terms (Scott 2002). This trade-off will always exist, and future designers should not 
expect that they will get only one side of it. 
30
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 33 ---
13. Business Restructuring Plan : Were there any requirements on restructuring 
business for the participating institutions? 
Many BBCI programs require participating institutions to submit business restructuring 
plans with the authorities. Used as a condition of any capital injection, the requirement of 
such plans can ease the path toward  long-term viability and carries the political benefit of 
putting conditions on the recipients of support. The potential downside is that governments 
generally do not have the expertise to properly vet these plans, and they run the risk of 
making things worse. As usual, the details vary, and designers should at least know the menu 
of options. 
For example, EC’s guidance on recapitalizing banks during the Global Financial Crisis 
required member states to submit business-restructuring plans for financial institutions 
unable to exit the BBCI program after six months. The deadline could be extended in six -
month increments if the crisis were to continue (European Commission 2008a) . The 
restructuring plan included disclosure o f impaired assets, structural changes, and burden -
sharing with the government  (European Commission 2009f) . On the other hand, US BBCI 
programs during the Global Financial Crisis did not require such agreements with 
participating financial institutions. 
Most BBCI programs in Asian countries responding to the financial crisis in 1997 –99 also 
required banks to submit and implement plans. For example, Indonesian banks seeking 
recapitalization submitted three -year business plans addressing items including: ( 1) t he 
current condition of the bank and weaknesses needing attention; (2) steps and schedule for 
resolution of problem loans and nonperforming property loans ; (3) the bank’s strategy to 
improve performance and health, both short and long  term; and ( 4) plans t o repay  the 
capital. In South Korea, the plans included details on a financial institution’s target capital 
adequacy ratio, profit-to-assets ratio, bad-loan ratio, and the written consent of the in-house 
labor union to restructuring. Often, these plans also included a consideration for merger, as 
seen in Indonesia and Malaysia. 
An exception was Japan’s BBCI under the FFSA in 1998. The FFSA did not mandate any 
examination or cleanup of bank balance sheets. Banks were, therefore, able to receive capital 
from the government without writing off any of their bad debts. Banks continued to 
improperly value their NPLs. This contributed to further undercapitalization and made it 
difficult for the government to accurately estimate how much capital was needed to properly 
recapitalize the banks (Fukao 2000). Thus, the following BBCI program seeking to improve 
upon the FFSA BBCI encouraged restructuring, corporate reorganization, and cost reduction 
by the participating banks. 
In Hungary, as a precondition to its 199 3–94 recapitalization, banks submitted 
“consolidation plans,” which were medium-term restructuring plans. The consolidation plan 
involved management strategies for their reorganization and to participate actively in 
enterprise debt resolution programs. This ag reement also prescribed certain restructuring 
procedures on an individual basis. 
31
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 34 ---
14. Fate of Existing Board and Management: Did the authorities  have the right to 
replace any board members or management of participating institutions? 
Replacing existing boards a nd management has similar benefits and costs as requirements 
of business restructuring discussed in the previous section. In a few cases, especially during 
the Nordic Crisis and the Asian Financial Crisis, voluntary recapitalization programs gave the 
authorities power to replace bank management. In other BBCI programs, the authorities 
could replace bank management if banks failed to achieve certain performance targets. 
In Norway’s 1991 BBCI, authorities could replace bank management (Moe, Solheim, and Vale 
2004). Although the members of the banks' governing bodies were replaced, the governance 
structure of the banks was maintained. This prevented the recapitalization authority from 
interfering with the banks’ day -to-day business operations  (Bergo 2003). Swed en’s 199 3 
BBCI and Nigeria’s AMCON also actively replaced management of troubled banks. 
In Malaysia, the authorities appointed a minimum of two nominees to serve as executive 
director and either chairman or deputy chairman on the board of directors of bene ficiary 
institutions. The amount of Tier 1 capital injected dictated additional board representation 
beyond the minimum two appointees. Reviewing the Malaysian program, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) cautioned that replacing a couple of directors and chief executives may 
not be sufficient; ineffective management teams may remain, with the potential for similar 
problems arising in the future (International Monetary Fund 1999). 
In Thailand, on the other hand, the government’s right to appoint board mem bers if banks 
issued Tier 1 capital under the BBCI, in combination with write -down requirements for 
existing shareholders, made banks wary of the Tier 1 capital injection program (World Bank 
2000, 33). Eventually, only banks already with large government holdings requested and 
received Tier 1 capital (Warr 2004, 74). 
Some authorities chose not to or neglected to exercise the right to replace existing boards 
and management. German y’s SoFFin, during the Global Financial Crisis, had the right to 
replace three board seats in a bank but did not exercise that right, since it did not intend to 
influence the bank’s decision -making or interfere with the ownership control of existing 
private shareholders. 
All three US BBCI programs in the GFC allowed the government to appoint two directors if a 
bank missed too many interest or dividend payments. In the case of the CDCI, the inspector 
general criticized the government for failing to act consistently on its own right to attend 
board meetings and appoint directors in the event of consecutive missed interest or dividend 
payments (Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program 
2014, 13) . For example, a CDCI recipient had missed 12 dividend payments, yet the 
government failed to place any representatives on the company’s board (Office of the Special 
Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program 2014, 14). On the other hand, when 
another recipient missed enough payments to warrant a government observer at its board 
meetings, the recipient rejected the observer but subsequently paid the back dividends. This 
suggested that enforcing management rights may lead to better compliance and less cost for 
32
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 35 ---
the government (Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Rel ief 
Program 2017, 57–58). 
15. Other Conditions: Should recapitalization come with nonprice conditions to 
incentivize banks to exit government support quickly? 
On balance, the picture is murky for an acute phase.  But once a crisis has reached a chronic 
phase, the balance would appear to favor conditions. 
Authorities have used several other nonprice conditions to incentivize banks to exit from the 
government support as soon as market conditions recovered. These conditions can also help 
build political support for  recapitalization programs. Restrictions on executive 
compensation and dividend payments were the most widely adopted in our survey. 
Requirements to maintain adequate lending to businesses and households were also 
widespread (Panetta et al. 2009) . Other examples include limiting or prohibiting share 
buybacks and subordinating existing shareholders to shares issued under BBCI programs. 
Sweden’s Bank Support Authority imposed profit -sharing arrangements so that taxpayers 
could take advantage of the upside of the BBCI program. 
These conditions, however, can come with some downsides. For US CPP, Calomiris and Khan 
(2015) point out that executive compensation restrictions were associated with less 
willingness on the part of banks to participate in the program. 
Conditions requiring participating banks to increase or maintain lending to individuals and 
small businesses or certain core industry sectors are politically tempting but carry risks. A 
relatively benign implementation requires only a plan and some reporting. For example, the 
US CAP (GFC) required participating banks to submit a plan for how they intended to use the 
capital to increase lending activities above levels that would have been possible without 
government support. It also required banks to s ubmit regular reports on their lending by 
category and to compare that lending to estimates of what lending would have been without 
government support. 
However, political pressure to leverage the state’s ownership in a bank to promote lending 
to a particular sector can interfere with a bank’s financial recovery and increase the odds the 
bank will require further support in the future. For example, an IMF report cautioned in the 
case of Malaysia that too much emphasis on loan growth by the central bank and t he 
interventions aimed at sparking growth had the potential to generate poor quality loans 
(International Monetary Fund 1999, 72). Similarly, in a more recent Russian BBCI program, 
the IMF urged the authorities to eliminate the monthly 1% credit-growth targets to selected 
sectors since forced lending could increase credit risks for banks and result in potential 
inefficient credit allocation. The IMF recommends that lending targets should instead be 
based on banks’ commercial assessment of risk and remuneration. 
Many BBCI programs subordinated payments to and imposed dividend restrictions on 
existing shareholders to further protect the government investment. For example, Denmark, 
Finland, Greece, Ireland, Japan (in the GFC), Mexico, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, the UK, 
and the US included dividend restrictions. At some level, such a restriction seems self -
33
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 36 ---
evident: if the government is injecting capital, then it would work directly against their goals 
for that capital to be immediately paid out to shareholders. In addition to the direct reduction 
in capital, allowing dividend payments carries political risk. The main argument against such 
a restriction is that it could serve to stigmatize program recipients. 
In the US CPP (GFC), when the government subscribed to preferred shares, recipient banks 
were required to be current on all dividends to the government before they could pay any 
dividends on  common shares and other junior or equivalently ranked shares. Such 
subordination is typical for preferred shares. However, there were no other restrictions on 
paying dividends to common shareholders. The participating financial institutions could 
even increase the amount of common share dividends with government approva l. After the 
third anniversary of the capital injection, publicly traded participating financial institutions 
could raise common share dividends by any amount without government approval. After 10 
years, all participating institutions could raise common sh are dividends by any amount 
without approval. A subsequent study by Calomiris and Khan (2015) argues that common 
share dividends should have been completely restricted despite the government’s assertions 
that, had they done so, the largest banks, such as J PMorgan Chase and Citigroup, might not 
have participated in the program.  Given the acute phase of the crisis when the policy was 
announced, we reserve judgement on this debate. 
16. Exit Strategy : Did the authorities have a plan to unload its investments once 
conditions normalized? Was the plan in place at the time of capital injection? 
Most governments do not want to be long -term investors in their banks.  But exiting from 
crisis era investments can be difficult, especially when the banks are not publicly traded , or 
if the government’s holdings are not in common equity. Since exit can be difficult, it is helpful 
to have a plan already in place at the start.  Just having a sunset date for investments is not 
sufficient—it is still necessary to sell or otherwise liquidate all of the earlier investments. 
The most common exit is a redemption arrangement, in which the bank agrees to buy back 
shares or pay back loans. These arrangements often include a premium, if the capital 
outstanding is not bought back by the participating bank within a certain period. Conversely, 
redemptions before a certain period can also have some restrictions. For example, the US 
CPP allowed redemption after three years, and early redemption was allowed only with the 
proceeds from the new issuance of Tier 1 qualifying perpetual preferred shares or common 
shares. Other strategies include the government selling its shares in participating banks to a 
private investor, sometimes holding an auction. 
Other price -related con ditions discussed above on convertibility, warrants, and step -up 
clauses for interest or dividend rates also incentivize the exit of the participating banks as 
soon as viable. Concurrent policy interventions such as restructuring, resolution, and asset 
purchases also assist in the government exiting from BBCI programs. 
The IMF tends to criticize governments that lacked exit strategies. An IMF note on Germany’s 
SoFFin emphasized that, to return to a functioning financial sector, concrete exit strategies 
for banks remaining in the capital injection program were essential, including ways to wind 
34
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 37 ---
up institutions. It recommended conversion of government capital into common shares, with 
a view to selling these shares to the private sector when market circumstances  permitted. 
Furthermore, it recommended that these strategic plans should aim at reducing the possible 
future need for such assistance, in part by raising private capital or by adjusting banks’ 
balance sheets (International Monetary Fund 2011). 
Similarly, the IMF criticized Nigeria’s AMCON for lack of explicit exit strategy. Again, it voiced 
concerns regarding the absence of a sunset provision for AMCON’s activities. In a 2012 
report, the IMF recommended that a “credible exit strategy [should be] devised to  ensure a 
smooth winding up of its operations by end-2017” (International Monetary Fund 2013, 12). 
The IMF emphasized that an explicit sunset date is “important to minimize fiscal risks and 
avoid potential moral hazard behavior by the banks”  (International Monetary Fund 2013, 
12). However, AMCON failed to implement an exit strategy , and the IMF reiterated its 
criticism in a 2019 report (International Monetary Fund 2019). 
17. Amendments to Relevant Regulations: Did the authorities amend any existing 
regulations that acted as a hurdle to participation in the capital injection?  Were 
there any amendments to regulation allowing easier access to foreign capital?  
Was there tightening of capital requirements? Did the authorities introduce a new 
resolution framework? 
In some cases, existing regulations must be amended to allow eligible institutions to 
participate in BBCI programs or to help the programs run smoothly. During the Nordic Crisis, 
both Norway and Sweden had to amend laws to allow the government to write down the 
value of existing bank shares without shareholder approval. For example, in Norway, when 
the government first attempted to recapitalize a bank by writing down its share value to 
zero, it faced legal o bjections from shareholders. The case was brought to court; the court 
agreed with the government’s view that the bank was insolvent, but to avoid similar 
occurrences in future recapitalizations, the legislature passed a new law allowing the 
government's discretion in writing down share value of the participating banks. 
The US RFC  could initially subscribe to cumulative nonassessable preferred stock. But the 
laws in most states prevented state -chartered banks and trust companies from issuing 
preferred stock.  Congress amended the law to clarify that, in those states, the RFC was 
authorized to purchase capital notes or debentures of state banks or trust companies in place 
of preferred shares. 
In France, the central bank increased the ceiling of non-core Tier 1 capital to 35% after some 
banks already reached the previous limit of 25% through participation in the BBCI program. 
This allowed banks to take full advantage of the capital injections provided by the program 
(Conac 2010). 
Some governments have changed the  rules to broaden the pool of private capital available 
for banks. The Mexican Congress modified bank ownership laws to permit foreign financial 
institutions to take control of troubled domestic banks. This quickly opened Mexico’s 
banking system to foreign  participation (Lubrano 1998, 11) . With the PROCAPTE 
35
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 38 ---
recapitalization, foreigners invested a significant amount of capital in Mexican banks. 
Foreign-controlled banks came to account for 20 % of the entire Mexican banking system’s 
assets; adding in the noncontrolling shares, that stake reached 30%. Foreign banks obtaining 
controlling and noncontrolling shares included Spanish, Canadian, US, and Hong Kong banks 
(Lubrano 1998) . Similarly, in Tha iland, to incentivize the entry of foreign capital, the 
government loosened restrictions on foreign ownership of Thai financial institutions in 1997 
(Santiprabhob 2003, 26–28). The Emergency Decree Amending the Commercial Banking Act 
lifted the 25 % ceiling on foreign ownership on a case -by-case basis and allowed 100 % 
foreign ownership by foreign investors that aimed to resolve or rehabilitate distressed 
financial institutions (Bank of Thailand 2000, 12). 
Some governments did not amend regulations, hindering their BBCI programs. As discussed 
above, in obtaining shareholder approval for issuance of new shares, the Indonesian capital 
markets regulation required banks to offer shareholders preemptive rights issues before 
they could issue new shares. The process for rights issues was lengthy, causing delays in 
recapitalization. While the Financial Services Authority (FSA) attempted to resolve this 
problem by allowing direct public offerings, it was faced with protests because the offerings 
did not protect minority shareholders. The delay persisted (Enoch, Garcia, and Sundararajan 
2001, 55). 
Other governments tightened regulatory requirements to meet international standards 
before banks were able to secure sufficient capital. This made it difficult for banks to recover. 
To prevent banks from having future problems, the Thai government raised supervisory 
standards, and new regulatory standards required banks and nonbank financial institutions 
to significantly increase their capital  (Vichyanond 2004, 217) . The Bank of Thailand also 
raised loan classification, provisioning, and reporting standards to bring Thai financial 
institutions in line with international standards by end -2000 (Vichyanond 2004, 217) . By 
the time that the BBCI program opened in late 1998, these regulatory changes were already 
in place. Although the Thai government allowed a transitional period phasing in the changed 
standards, to receive Tier 1 capital injections, institutions were required to make full end -
2000 provisions immediately and to forgo the  transitional period  (Bank for International 
Settlements 1999, 43; Nimmanahaeminda and Sonakul 1998) . These financial institutions, 
however, were already struggling because the new regulatory standards forced substantial 
write-downs on their capital, thus making it even harder for these institutions to become 
eligible for a capital injection (MacDonald 1998, 3–4; World Bank 2000, 33).   
In some countries, the government seize s the opportunity to establish a permanent legal 
framework for restructuring banks based on the experience with recapitalization in a crisis. 
In implementing policy interventions during financial crises, it is recommended to use the 
crisis as an opportunity to implement medium-term structural reforms, including improving 
the general quality of institutions, combating corruption, and building a more efficient 
judicial system. 
These reforms are positively associated with faster recovery. These measures of institutional 
development are also important determinants of the fiscal outlays  (Klingebiel, Claessens, 
and Laeven 2004). Germany passed an act allowing authorities to forcibly assume control of 
36
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 39 ---
or nationalize ailing financial institutions in early 2009, quick ly enabling the authorities to 
overcome resistance from existing shareholders and ease the process of intervening in 
troubled institutions whose failure may trigger a systemic crisis. France, on the other hand, 
did not; some criticize the authorities for failing to leverage the opportunity to pass a similar 
law (Conac 2010) . Other  nations, such as Colombia and Hungary, introduced prudential 
regulation of banks for the first time. 
Conclusion 
This paper surveys 17 Key Design Decisions for 36 cases of BBCI programs. These examples 
do not allow traditional empirical analysis. Nevertheless, we believe that several themes 
emerge from a close study of these cases. Below, we list and discuss seven of those themes. 
The most common mistake is for programs to be too sm all. We see this pattern in the 
case studies, and it is reinforced by the empirical literature (Brei, Gambacorta, and von Peter 
(2013); Giannetti and Simonov (2013); Poczter (2016)). And the discussion of Key Design 
Decision No. 5, Size,  lists several examples where programs were too small, delaying or 
preventing any positive effects. 
Combining BBCIs with other interventions is good practice.  BBCIs are politically 
challenging to do, and it is critical for the program to be of sufficient size.  As such, political 
constraints may prevent a program from being large enough at the beginning, and from 
getting an opportunity to adjust upward later. Combining other programs with BBCI can be 
a useful force multiplier. As discussed above in Key Design Decision No. 1, Part of a Package, 
debt and/or account guarantee programs have been a popular combination with BBCIs, 
appearing in 22 out of the 36 cases studied. Regarding the most well-studied example—the 
US CPP—several experts believe the combination with a debt guarantee program was pivotal 
to the success of the BBCI. 
Beware of legal/regulatory constraints on program implementation.  BBCI programs 
frequently require participating banks to increase their auth orized shares, eliminate an 
existing form of shareholder or debtor rights, or get an exemption from some other 
regulatory rule. These constraints are often far from the top of policymakers ’ concerns but 
ignoring them can lead an otherwise well-designed program into un necessary delays. Key 
Design Decisions No. 6 , Timing, and No. 17, Amendments to Relevant Regulations, discuss 
some examples. In an ideal world, policymakers would address as many of these problems 
as possible through legislation passed in quiet times, allowing for emergency authority to be 
utilized efficiently. 
Triage of banks, through stress tests or other means, is good practice in a chronic phase but 
may not be desirable (or even feasible) in an acute phase.  Designers want to get the right 
amount of capital into each bank and are understandably wary about sending any capital to 
unviable enterprises. During a chronic phase of a crisis, when run risk is low, a well-designed 
triage system can greatly mitigate these concerns. The case studies include several examples 
of such triage that have received positive postmortem reviews.  But the case studies also 
37
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 40 ---
show examples of well -intentioned triage that came too early in a crisis, slowing down the 
intervention and failing to provide any clarity for ban k counterparties. Key Design Decision 
No. 8, Eligible Institutions, gives some examples. As noted, better data and frequent stress -
testing since the GFC make it possible that some countries could now conduct a credible 
triage even in the acute phase of a crisis. 
Make sure that the exit plan fits the investment type.  It is all well and good to get the 
capital into the banks, but how will you get it out?  As discussed in Key Design Decision No. 
10, Capital Characteristics, some BBCIs use security-design features to accomplish this goal, 
with time -varying incentives for banks to replace the injections with private capital.  The 
ability to employ such clever design will vary by jurisdiction and by institutional form.  A 
good designer will be a ware of the options.  Several others are discussed in Key Design 
Decision No. 16, Exit Strategy. 
Security design can separate voting rights from the willingness to bear losses.  There 
are many cases where designers avoid common share investments because of a  desire to 
avoid government “control” over banks.  But there is no reason to constrain security choice 
for this reason.  It is possible to have the loss absorption of common shares without any 
voting control at all.  Conversely, if designers want to be higher  in the capital structure but 
also desire some control, that can be accomplished through contractual terms unattached to 
the typical voting rights of the security. The typical linkage of voting rights and loss -
absorption is frequently cited as a constraint, but it should not be. Key Design Decisions No. 
10, Capital Characteristics, gives several examples where these concepts were successfully 
separated. 
In the acute phase, simpler is better.  This theme applies across many design features: in 
the acute phase, designers are trying to communicate with bank counterparties. For many of 
these counterparties, the rational response to complexity is to “run .” Complex program 
design is often motivated by a natural desire to minimize moral hazard and protect 
taxpayers. In a chronic phase, those laudable goals can come to the forefront. But in an acute 
phase, simple capital structures and nonpunitive conditions have the best chance of 
attracting participation and preventing runs. 
  
38
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 41 ---
Glossary 
AMCON: Asset Management Corporation of Nigeria (Nigeria) 
BBCI: Broad-based capital injection 
BRSA: Banking Regulation and Supervision Authority (Turkey) 
BSA: Bank Support Authority (Sweden) 
CAP: Capital Assistance Program (US) 
CAR: Capital adequacy ratio 
CDCI: Community Development Capital Initiative (US) 
CDFI: Community Development Financial Institution (US) 
CDS: Credit default swap 
CoE: Certificate of Entitlement (Indonesia and others) 
COP: Congressional Oversight Panel (US) 
CPP: Capital Purchase Program (US) 
CSF: Capital Support Facilities (Thailand) 
DIA: Deposit Insurance Agency (Russia) 
EBA: European Banking Authority (EBA) 
EC: European Commission (Europe) 
EESA: European Economic Stabilization Act (Europe) 
EU: European Union (Europe) 
FDIC: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (US) 
FFSA: Financial Functions Stabilization Act (Japan) 
FIMBAG: Finanzmarktbeteiligung Aktiengesellschaft des Bundes (Austria) 
FinStaG: Financial Market Stability Act (Finanzmarktstabilitätsgesetz) (Austria) 
FOBAPROA: Fondo Bancario de Protección al Ahorro (Mexico) 
FOGAFÍN: Financial Institutions Guarantee Fund (Colombia) 
39
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 42 ---
FPIK: Fundusz Pomocy Instytucjom Kredytowym (Poland) 
FRC: Financial Reconstruction Commission (Japan) 
FROB: Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria (Spain)  
FSA: Financial Services Authority (Indonesia) 
GAO: Government Accountability Office (US) 
GBIF: Government Bank Insurance Fund (Norway) 
GDP: Gross domestic product 
IBRA: Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency (Indonesia) 
IMF: International Monetary Fund 
KDIC: Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation (Korea) 
Libor: London Interbank Offered Rate 
NPL: Nonperforming loans 
OECD: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
PROCAPTE: Programa de Capitalización Temporal (Mexico) 
RCC: Resolution and Collection Corporation (Japan) 
RFC: Reconstruction Finance Corporation (US) 
RWA: Risk-weighted assets 
SBIF: New and additional GBIF (Norway) 
SCAP: Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (US) 
SDIF: Saving Deposit Insurance Fund (Turkey) 
SFF: State Finance Fund (Norway) 
SoFFin: Sonderfonds Finanzmarktstabilisierung (Germany) 
SPPE: Société de prise de participation de l’État (France) 
TFEU: Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (Europe) 
UKFI: UK Financial Investments (UK)  
40
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 43 ---
References 
Allen, Linda, Suparna  Chakraborty, and Wako Watanabe. 2009. “Regulatory Remedies for 
Banking Crises: Lessons from Japan.” SSRN Electronic Journal, November.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/regulatory-remedies-banking-crises-lessons-japan 
Bank for International Settlements. 1999. Bank Restructuring in Practice. BIS Policy Papers, 
No. 6. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-restructuring-practice 
Bank Negara Malaysia. 1999. Annual Report 1998. March 1999.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-negara-malaysia-annual-report-1998 
———. 2004. Annual Report 2003. March 2004.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bank-negara-malaysia-annual-report-2003 
Bank of Thailand. 2001. Annual Economic Report 2000.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/annual-economic-report-2000 
Banking Act of 1933. June 16, 1933. Banking Act of 1933 . Public Law 73 -66. United States 
Congress.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banking-act-1933 
Baudino, Patrizia, Diarmuid Murphy, and Jean-Philippe Svoronos. 2020. “The Banking Crisis 
in Ireland.” FSI Crisis Management Series. Bank for International Settlements.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banking-crisis-ireland 
Bayoumi, Tamim. 2017. Unfinished Business: The Unexplored Causes of the Financial Crisis and 
the Lessons Yet to Be Learned. New Haven: Yale University Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/unfinished-business-unexplored-causes-
financial-crisis-and-lessons-yet-be-learned 
Bergo, Jarle. 2003. “Crisis Resolution and Financial Stability in Norway.” Speech by Mr. Jarle 
Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank, at the 50th Anniversary of  Bank Indonesia, 
December 10, 2003.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/crisis-resolution-and-financial-stability-norway 
Brei, Michael, Leonardo Gambacorta, Marcella Lucchetta, and Bruno Maria Parigi. 2020. “Bad 
Bank Resolutions and Bank Lending.” BIS Working Papers, No. 837, January.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/bad-bank-resolutions-and-bank-lending 
Brei, Michael, Leonardo Gambacorta, and Goetz von Peter. 2013. “Rescue Packages and Bank 
Lending.” Journal of Banking & Finance 37, no. 2: 490–505.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/rescue-packages-and-bank-lending 
41
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 44 ---
Calomiris, Charles W., and Urooj Khan. 2015. “An Assessment of TARP Assistance to Financial 
Institutions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, no. 2: 53–80.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4420 
Claessens, Stijn, Ayhan Kose, L uc Laeven, and Fabian Valencia , eds. 2014. Financial Crises: 
Causes, Consequences, and Policy Responses. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/financial-crises-causes-consequences-and-
policy-responses 
Clark, Tim, Matthew Kabaker, and Lee Sachs. 2020. “ Chapter 10: Bank Capital: Reviving the 
System.” In First Responders: Inside the U.S. Strategy for Fighting the 2007 –2009 Global 
Financial Crisis, edited by Ben S. Bernanke, Timothy F. Geithner, and Henry M. Paulson, Jr., 
with J. Nellie Liang. 254-288. New Haven: Yale University Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/first-responders-inside-us-strategy-fighting-
2007-2009-global-financial-crisis 
Conac, Pierre-Henri. 2010. “Mastering the Financial Crisis – The French Approach Discussion 
Report.” European Company and Financial Law Review 7, no. 2: 297–339.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/mastering-financial-crisis-french-approach-discussion-
report 
Culpepper, Pepper D., and Raphael Reinke. 2014. “Structural Power and Bank Bailouts in the 
United Kingdom and the United States.” Politics & Society 42, no. 4: 427–54.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3997 
Department of Finance. 2009. “Recapit alisation of Allied Irish Bank and Bank of Ireland.” 
Department of Finance.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/recapitalisation-allied-irish-bank-and-bank-ireland 
Eichengreen, Barry. 2014. Hall of Mirrors: The Great Depression, the Great Recession, and th e 
Uses-and Misuses-of History. New York: Oxford University Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/hall-mirrors-great-depression-great-
recession-and-uses-and-misuses-history 
Englund, Peter. 2015. “The Swedish 1990s Banking Crisis: A Revisit in the Light of Recent 
Experience.” Paper presented at the Riksbank Macroprudential Conference, Stockholm. June 23-24, 
2015.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/swedish-1990s-banking-crisis-revisit-light-recent-
experience 
Enoch, Charles, Barbara Baldwin, Olivier Frécaut, and Arto Kovanen. 2001. “Indonesia: 
Anatomy of a Banking Crisis Two Years of Living Dangerously, 1997 -99.” Inte rnational 
Monetary Fund Working Paper. WP 01/52. May 2001.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/16293 
42
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 45 ---
Enoch, Charles, Gillian Garcia, and V. Sundararajan. 2001. “Recapitalizing Banks with Public 
Funds.” IMF Staff Papers 48, no. 1: 58–110.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/recapitalizing-banks-public-funds 
European Commission. 2008a. “The Application of State Aid Rules to Measures Taken in 
Relation to Financial Institutions in the Context of the Current Global Financial Crisis .” 
Communication from the  Commission. Official Journal of the European Union , 2008/C 
270/02, October 25, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/communication-commission-application-
state-aid-rules-measures-taken-relation-financial 
———. 2008b. “State Aid N 613/2008 – Republic of France Capital -Injection Scheme for 
Banks.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/state-aid-n-6132008-republic-france-capital-injection-
scheme-banks 
———. 2009a. “State Aid N 31a/2009 - Denmark Recapitalisation of Credit Institutions and 
Amendments of the Guarantee Scheme.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/subject-state-aid-scheme-n31a2009-denmark-
recapitalisation-credit-institutions-and 
———. 2009b. “The Recapitalisation of Financial Institutions in the Current Financial Crisis: 
Limitation of Aid t o the Minimum Necessary and Safeguards against Undue Distortions of 
Competition.” Communication from the Commission. Official Journal of the European Union , 
2009/C 10/03, January 15, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/communication-commission-
recapitalisation-financial-institutions-current-financial 
———. 2009c. “State Aid N 97/2009 Italy. Amendment of Italian Bank Recapitalisation 
Scheme.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/17922 
———. 2009d. “ State Aid N 149/2009 – Recapitalisation of Bank of Ireland by the Irish 
State.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/recapitalisation-bank-ireland-irish-state 
———. 2009e. “ State Aid N 241/2009 – Recapitalisation of Allied  Irish Bank by the Irish 
State.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/recapitalisation-allied-irish-bank-irish-state 
———. 2009f. “Commission Communication on the Return to Viability and the Assessment 
of Restructuring Measures in the Financial Sector in the Current Crisis under the State Aid 
Rules.” Communication from the Commission. Official Journal of the European Union, 2009/C 
195/04, August 19, 2019.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/commission-communication-return-
viability-and-assessment-restructuring-measures 
43
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 46 ---
Fukao, Mitsuhiro. 2000. “Recapitalizing  Japan’s Banks: The Functions and Problems of 
Financial Revitalization Act and Bank Recapitalization Act.” Keio Business Review  38, Oct. 
2000: 1-16.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/recapitalizing-japans-banks-functions-and-problems-
financial-revitalization-act-and-bank 
Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Andrei Simonov. 2013. “On the Real Effects of Bank Bailouts: 
Micro Evidence from Japan.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics  5, no. 1: 135–67.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/real-effects-bank-bailouts-micro-evidence-japan 
Homar, Timotej, and Sweder J.G. van Wijnbergen. 2017. “Bank Recapitalization and 
Economic Recovery after Financial Crises.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 32 (October): 
16–28.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/bank-recapitalization-and-economic-
recovery-after-financial-crises 
Honohan, Patrick. 2012. “Recapitalisation of Failed Banks - Some Lessons from the Irish 
Experience.” Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the 
44th Annual 
Money, Macro and Finance Conference, Trinity College, Dublin, September 2012.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/recapitalisation-failed-banks-some-lessons-irish-
experience 
Houses of the Oireachtas. 20 16. “Volume 1: Report.” Joint Committee of Inquiry into the 
Banking Crisis.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/report-joint-committee-inquiry-banking-crisis-
government-republic-ireland 
International Monetary Fund  (IMF). 1999. “Malaysia: Selected Issues.” IMF Staff Country 
Report No. 99/86.  August 1999.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/malaysia-selected-issues 
———. 2011. “Germany: Technical Note on Crisis Management Arrangements.” Financial 
Sector Assessment Program Update 11/368, December 2011.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/germany-technical-note-crisis-management-
arrangements 
———. 2013. “Nigeria: 2012 Article IV Consultation.” IMF Country Report No. 13/116. May 
2013.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/17068 
———. 2019. “2019 Article IV Consultat ion: Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by 
the Executive Director for Nigeria.” IMF Staff Country Report 19/92. April 2019. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/2019-article-iv-consultation-press-release-staff-report-
and-statement-executive-director 
44
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 47 ---
Jester, Dan, David Nason, and Jeremiah Norton. 2020. “Chapter 8: Recapitalizing the Banking 
System.” In First Responders: Inside the U.S. Strategy for Fighting the 2007 –2009 Global 
Financial Crisis, edited by Ben S. Bernanke, Timothy F. Geithner, and Henry M. Paulson, Jr., 
with J. Nellie Liang, 208–25. New Haven: Yale University Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/first-responders-inside-us-strategy-fighting-2007-2009-
global-financial-crisis 
Jones, Jesse H. 1951. Fifty Billion Dollars; My Thirteen Yea rs with the RFC, 1932 –1945. New 
York: Macmillan & Co., Ltd.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/fifty-billion-dollars-my-thirteen-years-rfc-1932-1945 
Kalss, Suzanne. 2010. “Measures by the Austrian Regulatory Authorities in Response to the 
Financial Market  Crisis.” European Business Organization Law Review  (EBOR) 11 
(December): 257–548.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3170 
Klingebiel, Daniela, Stijn Claessens, and Luc Laeven. 2004. “Resolving Systemic Financial 
Crises: Policies and Institutions,” World Bank Policy Research Working Papers, 3377, August.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/resolving-systemic-financial-crises-policies-
and-institutions 
Kroes, Neelie. 2008. “State Aid N 507/2008 – UK Financial Support Measures to the Banking 
Industry in the UK.” European Commission.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/node/14435 
Kuusterä, Antti, and Juha Tarkka. 2011. Bank of Finland 200 Years: Imperial Cashier to Central 
Bank. Helsinki: Otava.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/bank-finland-200-years-imperial-cashier-
central-bank 
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2018. “Systemic Banking Crises Revisited.”  IMF Working 
Paper No. 18/206, September 14, 2018.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/systemic-banking-crises-revisited 
Landier, Augustin, and Kenichi Ueda. 2009. “The Economics of Bank Restructuring: 
Understanding the Options.” IMF Staff Position Note SPN/09/12, June 5, 2009.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/economics-bank-restructuring-understanding-options-0 
Lee, Hangyong, and Changyong Rhee. 2012. “Lessons from the 1997 and 2008 Crises in 
Korea.” Asian Economic Policy Review 7: 47–64.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/17128 
Lim, Wonhyuk, and Joonho Hahm. 2004. “Financial Globalization and Korea’s Post -Crisis 
Reform: A Political Economy Perspective.” Paper presented at the workshop on Financial 
Globalization and East Asian Capitalism, Stanford University, August 14-15, 2003.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-globalization-and-koreas-post-crisis-reform-
political-economy-perspective 
45
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 48 ---
Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Tomás Baliño, Charles Enoch, Anne -Marie Gulde, Marc Quintyn, and 
Leslie Teo. 2000. Financial Sector Crisis and Restructuring: Lesson s from Asia . Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/financial-sector-crisis-and-restructuring-lessons-asia 
Lubrano, Michele. 1998. “Mexico - Financial Sector Restructuring Loan Project [Loan 3911 -
ME].” Implementation Completion Report 18012. World Bank.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/report-no-18012-mexico-financial-sector-restructuring-
loan-project-loan-3911-me 
MacDonald, Claire. 1998. “A False Sense of Recovery.” Asian Business , December 1, 1998, 
Volume 34, Issue 12 edition. https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/false-sense-recovery 
Mackey, Michael W. 1999. Report of Michael W. Mackey on the Comprehensive Evaluation of 
the Operations and Functions of the Fund for the Protection of Bank Savings ‘FOBAPROA’ and 
Quality of Supervision of the FOBAPROA Program 1995 -1998. Report to the Congress of Mexico, 
July 1999.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4532 
Mariathasan, Mike, and Ouarda Merrouche. 2012. “Recapitalization, Credit and Liquidity.” 
Economic Policy 27, no. 72: 603–46.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/recapitalization-credit-and-liquidity 
Metrick, Andrew, and Paul Schmelzing. 2021. “Ban king-Crisis Interventions, 1257 –2019.” 
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 29281. September 2021.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/banking-crisis-interventions-1257-2019 
Moe, Thorvald, Jon Solheim, and Bent Vale , eds . 2004. “The Norwegian Banking Crisis.” 
Norges Bank Occasional Papers, no. 33. 2004.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/norwegian-banking-crisis 
Montgomery, Heather, and Satoshi Shimizutani. 2009. “The Effectiveness of Bank 
Recapitalization Policies in Japan.” Japan and the World Economy 21, no. 1: 1–25.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/effectiveness-bank-recapitalization-policies-japan 
Nimmanahaeminda, Tarrin, and M. R. Chatumongol Sonakul. 1998. “Thailand Letter of Intent, 
August 25, 1998,” August 25, 1998.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-letter-intent-august-25-1998 
Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program  (Office of 
SIGTARP). 2009. “Emergency Capital Injections Provided to Support the Viability of Bank of 
America, Other Major Banks, and the US Financial System.” Report No. SIGTARP -10-001. 
October 5, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/node/17467 
———. 2014. “Banks and Credit Unions in Tarp’s CDCI Program Face Challenges.” Quarterly 
Reports to Congress. August 30, 2014.  
46
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 49 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/banks-and-credit-unions-tarps-cdci-program-face-
challenges 
———. 2017. “Quarterly Report to Congress.” January 27, 2017.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-january-27-2017 
Panetta, Fabio, Thomas Faeh, Giuseppe Grande, Corrinne Ho, Michael King, eds. 2009. An 
Assessment of Financial Sector Rescue Programmes . BIS Papers No. 48. Basel: Bank for 
International Settlements . https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/assessment-financial-sector-
rescue-programmes 
Philippon, Thomas, and Philipp Schnabl. 2013. “Efficient Recapitalization.” Journal of Finance 
68, no. 1: 1–42.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/efficient-recapitalization 
Poczter, Sharon. 2016. “The Long -Term Effects of  Bank Recapitalization: Evidence from 
Indonesia.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 25 (January): 131–53.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/long-term-effects-bank-recapitalization-
evidence-indonesia 
Quintyn, Marc and David S. Hoelscher. 2003. Managing Systemic Banking Crises. Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/index.php/library/document/managing-systemic-banking-
crises 
Santiprabhob, Veerathai. 2003. Lessons Learned from Thailand’s Experience with Fi nancial-
Sector Restructuring. Bangkok: Thailand Development Research Institute.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/lessons-learned-thailands-experience-financial-sector-
restructuring 
Scott, David. 2002. “A Practical Guide to Managing Systemic Financial Cr ises: A Review of 
Approaches Taken in Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, and Thailand.”  Washington, DC:  
World Bank Group.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/practical-guide-managing-systemic-financial-crises-
review-approaches-taken-indonesia 
Spindle, Bill, and Phred Dvorak. 2000. “Japan’s Drive to Clear Bad Debt Wilts as New Bosses 
Rotate through Agency.” Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2000.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/japans-drive-clear-bad-debt-wilts-new-bosses-rotate-
through-agency 
Tong, Hui, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2020. “Did Unconventional Interventions Unfreeze the Credit 
Market?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12, no. 2: 284–309.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/did-unconventional-interventions-unfreeze-
credit-market 
47
Broad-Based Capital Injection Programs Rhee et al.

--- Page 50 ---
US Department of the Treasury  (US Treasury) . 1959. “Final Report of the Reconstruction 
Finance Corporation.” Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. May 6, 1959.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/18178 
US Government Accountability Office (US GAO). 2012. “Capital Purchase Program: Revenues 
Have Exceeded Investments, but Concerns about Outstanding Investments Remain.” Report 
to Congressional Committees. GAO-12-301.  March 2012.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/17986 
Vichyanond, Pakorn. 2004. “Chapter 7: Dealing with Debt: NPLs and Debt Restructuring.” In 
Thailand Beyond the Crisis, edited by Peter Warr, 208–31. New York: RoutledgeCurzon.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-beyond-crisis 
Warr, Peter, ed. 2004. Thailand Beyond the Crisis. New York: RoutledgeCurzon.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-beyond-crisis 
Woll, Cornelia. 2014. The Power of Inaction: Bank Bailouts in Comparison . Cornell Studies in 
Political Economy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/power-inaction-bank-bailouts-comparison 
World Bank. 2000. “Thailand - Social and Structural Review - Beyond the Crisis: Structural 
Reform for Stable Growth.” Pre-2003 Economic or Sector Report No. 19732.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/thailand-social-structural-review-beyond-crisis-
structural-reform-stable-growth 
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact th e Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
48
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1