--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Frederic Mishkin Lessons Learned: Frederic Mishkin 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Frederic Mishkin," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 
209-211. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1429 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/11 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/11

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Frederic Mishkin  
By Matthew A. Lieber 
Rick Mishkin served as a member of the Board of  Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
from 2006 to 2008 and as director of research at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York from 
1994 to 1997. A leading expert on monetary economics and financial markets and a professor 
at Columbia University’s School of Business since 1983, Mishkin has written 20 books, 
including the textbook The Economics of Money, Banking , and Financial Markets . This 
Lessons Lea rned is based on an interview with Mishkin conducted on October 20 , 2020; the 
full transcript may be accessed here. 
In r esponding to  a crisis, the most effec tive solutions may not be obvious , so 
organizations need to be flexible and innovative.  
The Federa l Reserve’s actio ns during the crisis, Mishki n said , show the quality of the 
organization. Mishkin  assessed the  Fed’s 2007 –08 crisis response as relatively e ffective: 
“Things were done in a systematic way, on the one hand, but in a completely non -
systematic way on the oth er,” he said. He commended the Fed o n its flexibility and 
innovation.  
According to Mis hkin, the Fed  tried one thing , and if that did not wor k, it said, “we need 
something else.”  
The Fed kept on bringing one program up after another. Some worked, and so me 
didn’t work. And the ones that worke d, the ones you threw against the wall that 
stuck, you kept them there. And then the ones that didn ’t, you let go by the board. 
But it was educated ; it wasn’t that they were just throwing stupid stuff against the 
wall. They were throwing good work against the wall.  
Crucially, shared Mis hkin, the Fed was able to  learn, develop new methods, and continue 
innovating until something worked. For example, h e continued, in August 2007, interbank 
lending markets came under serious strain after the first  disclosure of massive losses in 
subprime securities at BNP Paribas. At Mishkin’s urging, the Fed lowered the discount rate. 
But it didn’t work. Banks feared that borrowing at the discount window might trigger a run 
on deposits. Bank funding markets remained seized up. In December 2007, the Fed 
launched the Term Auction Facility (TAF) , which  inspired more confidence amo ng banks 
and enabled the Fed to support a broader range of counterparties without the stigma of the 
discount window. 
Another example of the Fed’s flexibility and innovation Mishkin cited is with respect to 
quantitative easing. According to Mishkin, Fed Chair Ben Bernanke established that we had 
to “try to keep credit markets functioning and  keep credit s preads from gettin g out of 
control. But the methods of doing it were not clear.” 
209

--- Page 4 ---
With short-term interest rates near zero, the Fed’s main monetary policy to ol was spent.  
However, the central bank can push long-term rates down by buying financial assets, which 
it did in a massive way with effective r esults. There was much deba te about the explosion 
in the size of the Fed ’s balance sheet. But, Mishkin explained, the Fed’s emphasis was 
always on the credi t markets and the spreads between sho rt- and long -term rates. The 
expansion of the balance sheet follow ed as a consequence ; it was not the objec tive. 
“Quantitative easing” suggests a balance -sheet expansion witho ut a focus on credit 
conditions, Mishkin said. F or that reason, he recalled, Bernanke would have preferred 
people to call it “credit easing.” 
Past crisis experience can be used to pr epare for future crises: The Global Financial 
Crisis provided a war games experience for the Fed’s COVID-19 response. 
Mishkin noted that the contrasts between the Fed’s 2007 and 2020 interve ntions are 
consistent with findings from his academic research on central bank effectiveness as lender 
of last resort: “The faster you [ease credit], the less you ha ve to do. It is on e of the key 
lessons of financial crises.”  Mishkin pointed to the Black M onday market cras h in  1987: 
“[Former Fed chair Alan ] Greenspan got up and announced that they were going to have a 
program of opening up the discount window to whoever needed it. And, as a result, nobody 
needed to borrow.” In 2007–2008, Mishkin said, the Fed  
was pretty good during the financial crisis, but not nearly as fast. And I thought they 
were a little bit behind the curve, but still re latively very good. But they really were 
ahead of the cur ve with the COVID crisis. And that’s one of the reasons why  we’re 
doing as well as we are. 
We’re fortunate to have had the Global Financial Crisis before the C OVID-19 pandemic, 
Mishkin said; it acted as sort of a war game for a future crisis.  In 2020, the Fed understood 
its lender of last resort role much better than it did in 2007, Mishkin continued. The agency 
had on the shelf a game plan  for fighting a crisis, including emergency programs. The Fed 
announced the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and the Commercial Paper Funding 
Facility (CPFF) four days after the March 13 national emergency order. By contrast, it took 
the Fed seven months to deploy the same  facilities following similar credit market tremors 
in August 2007.   
He described how the Fed applied its learning to the COVID response in March 2020:  
The Fed took all these programs that t hey had developed during the financial crisis 
and restarted them again, with some additions that were clear because of the COVID 
issue. It wasn ’t j ust Wall Street that was a problem. There were a lot of small 
businesses that were running into problems. Remarkably, the federal government 
response was incredibly rapid. I t was done  within two weeks, rather than  over a 
year.  
210
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
The results were effective, said Mishkin. First, the Fed delivered a remarkably rapid 
response. And second, it was a highly effective intervention amounting to a case of crisis 
prevention. Overall, said Mishkin, the Fed “performed brilliantly in March of 2020.” 
Intervention assessment and crisis preparation shou ld continue after the cris is has 
calmed, because the land scape will have changed  and the next crisis may r equire 
different modalities.  
Assessing post-crisis reforms, Mishkin said t he most important change is that banks are 
much better capitalized than  they were before. Also improv ed is the capitaliza tion and 
monitoring of large nonbanks, with investment banks transformed or subsumed into bank 
holding companies. Shadow banking, which “b lew us up” in 2007, is less of a vulnerability 
today. 
Mishkin worried, however, about the Federal Reserve’s capacity in a future crisis to serve 
as lender of last resort. Under the Dodd-Frank Act, use of the Federal Reserve Act’s Section 
13(3) emergency lending authority is conditioned upon the Treasury secretary’s approval. 
He noted: 
So, the good news is that we had a sensible Treasury during the COVID crisis. All of 
these things that the Fed is doing could not have been done without the support of 
the Treasury. But what if you have somebody political, or the person who was the 
head of the Treasury didn’t know what the hell he or she was doing? Then you could 
be in real trouble. So, it turned out that’s actually a very bad feature of Dodd-Frank. 
More g enerally, Mishkin is concerned about political pressures on the Fed. Mishkin fears 
that the current Fed  under Chair Jerome Powell is acting like more of a fiscal agent of the 
Treasury than an independent central bank. Congressional failure to legislate on issues like 
income distribution and racial discrepancies, Mishkin said, has politicized the Fed at the 
expense of its fo cus on a limited set of monetar y a nd financial objectives: “The Fed has 
moved from being a pure monetary policy institution, now to actually having quasi -fiscal 
policy elements. And that’s not a good thing for the institution.”  
 
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-04 
Copyright © Yale University. 
 
211
Lessons Learned: Frederic Mishkin Lieber