--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans: The Impact of the From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans: The Impact of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic on the Economy and on the Financial System COVID-19 Pandemic on the Economy and on the Financial System 
Antonio Sánchez Serrano 
European Systemic Risk Board 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Sánchez Serrano, Antonio (2022) "From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans: The Impact of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic on the Economy and on the Financial System," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : 
Iss. 3, 99-164. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1421 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/3 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol4/iss3/3

--- Page 3 ---
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans: The 
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Economy 
and on the Financial System  
Antonio Sánchez Serrano 1, 2 
Abstract 
The COVID-19 pandemic created an unprecedented economic shock across the world. As a 
result of the coronavirus outbreak  and the related health measures, nonfinancial 
corporations providing nonessential goods or services that cannot be consumed remotely 
have experienced a large decrease in their turnover. Using balance sheets and flows 
statements, we are able to quantify the impact of the pandemic on nonfinancial corporations 
and households, according to several scenarios for the pandemic over 2021. The impa ct is 
largely heterogeneous across sectors and amounts to up to 20% of the turnover for euro area 
nonfinancial corporations. Stress in these corporations and households can spill over to 
banks in the form of nonperforming loans  (NPLs). The size and targete d nature of 
government support as well as the financial soundness ( that is , net worth) with which 
economic agents entered the pandemic define the amount of NPLs that arise. Based on our 
estimates, the increase of NPLs seems limited, also when considering s econd-round effects 
from corporate insolvencies (about 5% to 7% of total loans). However, in certain cases, when 
banks are only slightly above the minimum prudential requirement of the leverage ratio, 
their solvency position may be threatened. 
 
Keywords: government support, net worth, nonperforming loans, pandemic  
 
JEL Classifications: G21, G33, G51, H12
 
1 Antonio Sánchez Serrano, Senior Lead Economist, European Systemic Risk Board,   
antonio.sanchez@esrb.europa.eu. 
2 Disclaimer: The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the 
views of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), any of its member institutions, or the ESRB Secretariat. 
Comments by colleagues at the ESRB Secreta riat, by Javier Suarez, and by anonymous referees are kindly 
acknowledged. All remaining errors are the author’s. 
 
99

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction and Motivation 
In the early months of 2020, a virus originating in China spread across the world, driving the 
coronavirus disease (COVID -19) toward the most severe pandemic in this century. Before 
this event , little attention was paid to the economic consequences of pandemics. Two 
pioneering papers, written in the context of the SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) 
outbreak in 2005, are worth noting. McKibbin and Sidorenko (2006) develop s a model 
considering the consequences of a flu-like pandemic on the global economy under different 
scenarios and finds that a pandemic similar to the Spanish flu would cause a drop of real GDP 
exceeding 10%. The US Congressional Budget Office (US CBO 2005) undert akes a similar 
exercise, and its severe scenario implies a GDP drop close to 5%. 
The nature of the shock the COVID -19 pandemic has caused is unprecedented and differs 
significantly from other episodes of crisis in peace times, such as the Global Financial Crisis 
(GFC) or the oil crisis in the 1970s. It is necessary to go back to the Spanish flu of 1918–1919 
and to the Great Depression to find a similar shock to the world economy during peace years. 
Garrett (2007) looks at the response to the pandemic by different cities in the US in 1918 –
1919 and finds that those cities that went for a total lockdown suffered more severe 
economic losses in the short term (up to 50% in rest aurants, for example) but were able to 
recover quickly. Cities that implemented partial lockdowns did not get any tangible results 
from these policies. De Santis and Van der Veken (2020) quantify a sizable impact of the 
pandemic in terms of output loss and macroeconomic risks, perceiving an increase in income 
inequality across countries. Barro , Ursúa, and Weng  (2020) identify a decrease in GDP and 
in consumption of 6% and 8% , respectively, as a result of the Spanish flu pandemic. On the 
post-pandemic impact, Brainerd and Siegler (2003) find a strong positive influence of the 
Spanish flu pandemic on growth in the subsequent 10 years. Going further into past similar 
shocks, Jordà, Singh, and Taylor (2020) study several pandemics (and wars) over history and 
conclude that the macroeconomic effects of pandemics persist for about 40 years, with real 
rates of return substantially depressed, as there was no destruction of capital in previous 
pandemics (contrary to wars). 
Since March 2020, international institutions, central banks, and the academic community 
have tried to forecast economic growth under the COVID -19 pandemic, based on models 
developed to take into account the specific functioning of an economy subject to a contagious 
virus. The magnitude of the economic recession the COVID-19 pandemic has caused is found 
to be particularly significant ( ECB 2020; IMF 2021). The COVID -19 pandemic shock is 
somehow unique. Differently from “typical” financial shocks, it did not originate in the 
financial system and is affect ing all countries to a certain extent (the GFC, by contrast, did 
not substantially affect emerging economies). Each national economy has been  hit by the 
pandemic with a different degree of resilience and subject to different vulnerabilities. The 
ultimate e conomic impact of the COVID -19 pandemic accordingly depends on these t wo 
factors, which also interrelate closely with the combined policy response, in terms of 
committed and potential fiscal space of governments. 
100
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
The outbreak of the COVID -19 pandemic has spurred an intense research effort in the 
academic community to understan d the nature and size of the shock it caused. With no 
purpose of being exhaustive, we can highlight the findings of McKibbin and Fernando (2020), 
which models seven scenarios for the evolution of the pandemic and assess es their impacts 
on GDP. Even the milder scenarios could significantly affect the global economy in the short 
term, with more severe scenarios leading to negative GDP growth rates of about 10% in the 
first year after the pandemic outbreak. Battistini and Stoevsky (2020) consider s the impact 
across the main sectors of nonfinancial corporations and find s large heterogeneity across 
them, although with a bleak picture overall. Carletti et al. (2020) find s that a three -month 
lockdown could decrease profits of nonfinancial corporations by 10% of quarterly GDP. The 
authors identify more frequent distress in small and medium -size enterprises (SMEs), in 
highly leveraged nonfinancial corporations before the pandemic, and in the manufacturing 
and wholesale trade sectors. Boissay and Rungcharoenkitkul (202 0) take s stock of the 
existing literature and of the latest forecasts regarding the impact s of the COVID -19 
pandemic. Gourinchas et al. (2020) use s a model to estimate the impact of the COVID -19 
pandemic on business failures among SMEs in 17 countries usin g firm -level data. In the 
absence of government support policies, failures are expected to increase significantly , 
although they should not threaten the aggregated solvency position of banks.  
More recently, Mojon, Rees, and Schmieder (2021) also finds substantial losses in the sectors 
most affected by the pandemic , but these do not translate into large corporate credit loss 
rates, because the most affected sectors account for a smaller share of borrowing by 
nonfinancial corporations than during the GFC. Eb eke et al. (2021) simulate s the relief 
provided by government measures to a sample of 4 million European nonfinancial 
corporations. Assuming different sectoral shocks, the authors find these measures to have 
been effective in mitigating job destruction and  liquidity issues. The focus of Aiyar et al. 
(2021) and the Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development ( OECD 2021) is 
on whether the European banking system would be able to absorb the expected increase of 
nonperforming loans (NPLs) . In both cases, the answer seems to be positive, without 
excluding some potential difficulties of certain banks breaching the requirement fo r the 
maximum distributable amount, in particular for hybrid forms of capital. 
What emerges from the analyses above is that the COVID -19 pandemic is generating 
substantial economic losses, which would need to be absorbed by one or various economic 
sectors at some point. In this regard, governments’ policy measures (such as debt moratoria, 
loan guarantees , and other initiatives of a fiscal nature) can be seen as allocating these 
economic losses across sectors (for example, loan guarantees imply a share of possible future 
credit losses between banks and governments) and over time (for example, loan moratoria 
may provide some relief to borrowers in the repayment of their loans). 
In this paper, we contribute to the effort to quantify the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic 
by using an approach based on stylized balance sheets and inflows and outflows for each 
economic sector. The ultimate objective is to gauge the degree to which different economic 
agents are differently affected and whether the banking system, as ma in lender for 
nonfinancial corporations and households, could absorb the related losses. Our paper places 
101
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 6 ---
itself close to Gourinchas et al. (2020) ; Aiyar et al. (2021) ; Mojon, Rees, and Schmieder  
(2021); and the OECD (2021). 
At this stage, it is important to make a methodological clarification. We do not consider cash 
flows but rather inflows and outflows. Cash  flows require that cash (or cash equivalents) 
enter or leave the economic agent and, as such, do not include changes in valuations of 
financial assets or changes in pension liabilities. These are important wealth channels for 
households, and we want to consider them in our paper as well . Therefore, our inflows and 
outflows are close to the concept of “economic flows” used in national accounts. Accordi ng 
to the United Nations  (UN) System of National Accounts, “economic flows” reflect the 
creation, transformation, exchange, transfer , or extinction of economic value; they involve 
changes in the volume, composition, or value of an institutional unit’s asse ts and liabilities 
(UN 2009). 
We provide answers to four important questions related to the shock the COVID -19 
pandemic has caused: (1) which sectors of activity are most affected by the pandemic , and 
what do these findings imply in terms of cross -country asymmetric impacts; (2) how much 
can nonfinancial corporations and households lose as a result of the pandemic, and how does 
the evolution of the pandemic determine these losses; (3) what do these losses mean for 
solvency of the real economy in the coming months, and which portion of these losses can 
become NPLs on banks’  balance sheet; and (4) given their current (non -risk-weighted) 
capital levels, the capacity of banks to absorb losses triggered by NPLs. Looking at available 
data for the euro area (cutoff date for our analysis is the second quarter of 2021) and drawing 
on the accounting information for each economic sector, we provide an estimate of the 
magnitude and shape of the shock the COVID -19 pandemic caused. These estimates should 
not be seen  as accurate predictions but rather as an indication of the size of the issues at 
stake.  
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the inflows of economic agents (for example, through 
a reduction in sales of nonfinancial corporations), resulting in large negative changes in their 
net worth. These negative changes in net worth may translate into solvency issues, as the 
balance sheets of economic agents may deteriorate to the point of putting their long -term 
financial sustainability into question. Despite the devel opment of vaccines, it has 
increasingly been recognized that it may take almost two more years to overcome the 
COVID-19 pandemic and that its effects may be more structural in terms of changes in global 
production processes or changes in preferences of eco nomic agents than initially thought .3 
Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic shock is also affecting existing economic relationships 
in both the real economy and the financial sector, such as those related to organizational 
capital, human capital , and the pro vision of credit. A long -lasting disruption in these 
economic relationships could have permanent and severe effects, hampering the growth 
path over the long term. In other words, there is still a lot of uncertainty about the long-term 
 
3 For example, a decline in investment, if temporary, may not have permanent consequences for technological 
development, but an extended peri od of low investment would have serious effects on innovation and 
(potential) growth. 
102
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
structural “scars” le ft by the pandemic on economic activity, a relevant topic that falls, 
however, outside the scope of our paper. 
This paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the four main economic 
sectors (nonfinancial corporations, households, financial intermediaries, and government), 
and the third section discusses how the COVID-19 pandemic (or any virus-driven pandemic, 
in general) impacts the balance sheet and the inflows and outflows of the first two of these 
sectors. Section IV deepens the analysis by estimating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
under several scenarios and provides estimates of NPLs generated by the pandemic. Section 
V considers whether the banking sector may be resilient enough to absorb the related 
impact, b ased on the excess own funds from the binding prudential leverage ratio 
requirement. Section VI concludes. Several appendixes provide additional information on 
our analysis. 
II. A Stylized View of the Main Economic Sectors 
We start with an economy composed of four sectors: households, nonfinancial corporations, 
financial intermediaries, and the government. For clarity, we do not consider the external 
sector or banks, insurers, pension funds, and investment funds separately, but as part of the 
same sector (financial intermediaries). Each of these sectors has a balance sheet with assets 
and liabilities (including net worth as the difference between assets and liabilities), and it is 
subject of inflows and outflows. The difference between them determines the changes in net 
worth. Net worth is a central concept in our assessment of the economic impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic. It is indeed a fundamental variable to understand the allocation of credit in an 
economy as well as the c hannels through which shocks can be amplified or extend ed over 
time (Kiyotaki and Moore 1997).4 
The balance sheet of each sector is considered on a consolidated basis and is described in 
further detail in the paragraphs below. Appendix A complements this information, adding 
data for the whole euro area as of the end of 2019. We consider the most relevant items in 
terms of size, interconnections with other sectors, and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and 
the related policy measures. 
 
4 In the case of bank lending, a reduction in the value of durable assets diminishes the net worth of the economic 
agent, resulting in a lower value of assets available to be used as collateral in loans. Borrowers’ credit limits are 
determined by assets to be pledged as collateral: the higher these assets, the higher the borrower’s lending 
possibilities. In economic cris es, the interaction between credit limits and asset p rices multiplies the initial 
shock because of  reduced credit and reduced asset values. In general terms, the higher the net worth of a 
potential borrower, the less pronounced are agency problems in the form of moral hazard and adverse 
selection. A reductio n in net worth thus aggravates agency problems, and the resulting frictions might 
negatively affect entire segments in the financial markets. This holds true particularly if economic agents are 
hit by an aggregate shock that is beyond their control and if standard sorting and screening mechanisms 
focused on idiosyncratic risks reach their limits. In the field of monetary policy, Bernanke and Gertler (1995) 
stress the potential impact of changes in monetary policy on borrowers’ balance sheets and income statements, 
including variables such as net worth, cash flows, and liquid assets. 
103
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 8 ---
Households. Their balance sheet comprises real estate, financial assets, pension rights , and 
other assets on the assets side , and mortgages, other loans, and future tax liabilities on the 
liabilities side. Households receive inflows from their work (wages), interest and dividends  
from the financial assets they own, and transfers from the government (such as 
unemployment benefit or pensions). Their main outflows are consumption, taxes , and the 
repayment of mortgages and other loans. The difference between their inflows and outflows 
can be seen as their savings for the period, affecting their net worth on the liabilities side of 
their balance sheet. 
Nonfinancial corporations . Their main assets are fixed assets, inventories (only in case of 
industrial nonfinancial corporations), receivables, financial assets, and cash. On the liabilities 
side, they have loans from banks, bonds, payables to suppliers, pension obligations, future 
tax liabilities, and shares and other equity. In terms of inflows, the main sources are sales 
(comprising sales of final products, the provision of services, sales of intermediate products 
to other nonfinancial corporations, and public consumption), funding for investment, and 
transfers from governments (for example, grants). Their main outflows ar e wages, 
depreciation of fixed assets, interest on loans and bonds, and dividends paid to shareholders. 
The difference between inflows and outflows can be seen as the profit for the period. 
Financial intermediaries. They have loans, bonds, and shares in the asset side of their balance 
sheet, and deposits, technical reserves, pension obligations, bonds, and shares and other 
equity on the liabilities side. The composition of the balance sheet reflects the heterogeneity 
of business models and institutions considered in this sector.5 As inflows, the main ones are 
interest from mortgages and other loans, dividends from their holdings of shares, insurance 
premia, and net valuation gains (which include gains from trading with financial assets, asset 
management fees and other fees). Their main outflows are wages, interest on deposits and 
bonds, loan losses, insurance claims, and dividends paid to their shareholders. As with 
nonfinancial corporations, the difference between inflows and outflows is the profit for the 
period (or the change in net wealth). 
Government. Its balance sheet reflects the present value of fees and taxes to be collected, fixed 
assets, and shares on the asset side, and pension rights, bonds, and other liabilities  on the 
liabilities side. The main  inflow government takes  is the flow of taxes and fees, which 
depends on the overall level of economic activity. Its main outflows are interest on bonds, 
wages, public consumption, public investment, and transfers to households and nonfinancial 
corporations. The difference between inflows and outflows generates a deficit when it is 
negative (which would then need to be funded with sovereign debt) and a surplus when it is 
positive. 
 
5 Like nonfinancial corporations, financial intermediaries  could also have fixed assets and real estate  on the 
asset side of their balance sheet, particularly insurance corporati ons and pension funds. We do not consider 
them, for the sake of simplicity. 
104
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
III. The Impact of the COVID -19 Pandemic on Non financial 
Corporations and Households 
This section provides a stylized view of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related 
health measures on nonfinancial corporations and households. The findings  can also be 
applied to other pandemics driven by a contagious virus or pathogen. For completeness, the 
impacts on the government sector and on the external sector are briefly described in 
Appendix B. 
A. Nonfinancial Corporations: A Reduction in Revenues from Lower Consumption 
Following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, strict health measures were put in place 
(and some are still in place) to contain the spread of the virus and alleviate the stress in 
health infrastructure. However, such measures (many of which restrict the mobility of the 
population) have led to an important reduct ion in economic activity. On top of that, 
households have also adjusted to the risk of infection and have considered changes in their 
behavior in relation to social distancing (for example, in their leisure activities). 
The first immediate consequence of t he COVID -19 pandemic and of the related health 
measures limiting movement of population s has been a sharp reduction in consumption 
(Battistini and Stoevsky 2020; CCSA 2020; Kohlscheen, Mojon, and Rees 2020). An increase 
in precautionary savings in response  to the uncertainty about the future has also been 
observed. The reduction of consumption has been particularly acute in nonessential goods 
and services that cannot be consumed from home (for example, cars or traveling). That is an 
important distinction to  be made, as the consumption of essential goods and services (for 
example, food) has not been reduced. There is also a third category of goods and services for 
which consumption may have increased: those that are both  nonessential and can be 
consumed from home (for example, online TV). The impact of the pandemic is more acute in 
the first category and more nuanced in the other two.  
Furthermore, there is a differential impact in the case of nonfinancial corporations providing 
services or producing goods. Nonfinancial corporations providing services are not able to 
recover the services not provided during the pandemic (meaning a loss for the whole 
economy) while industri al sectors may recover their lower sales with higher consumption 
once the pandemic is over. Moreover, there can be disruptions in global supply chains, 
derived from the closing of borders, the discontinuation of the production of intermediate 
goods, and disruptions in transportation. 
The decrease of consumption implies a sharp drop in the revenues of nonfinancial 
corporations. Based on their flows, nonfinancial corporations may react to the decline  by 
increasing other sources of inflows or by decreasing som e outflows. From the other two 
sources of inflows, capital inflows do not seem to have increased during the COVID -19 
pandemic while transfers from the government have materially grown, as support to 
nonfinancial corporations has been one of the main policy  targets of governments. Looking 
at outflows, temporary or permanent layoffs decrease wages paid and compensate the 
105
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 10 ---
reduction in revenues, while interest on loans and bonds seems more problematic to reduce. 
If we assume that dividends paid depend on the ge neration of profit and do not take place 
during the pandemic, and that the amortization of tangible goods is still going on, it seems 
difficult to avoid a sharp reduction in net worth of nonfinancial corporations. In a longer -
term perspective, nonfinancial  corporations can adjust to lower revenues through 
postponement of investments, a reduction of purchases from their suppliers , or with 
additional debt to cover working capital. Furthermore, as precautionary savings have 
increased, consumption decisions may  be postponed until the pandemic is over. This 
decision is particularly important for sectors such as real estate, where the transaction price 
is high in comparison with the disposable income of households.  
On that basis, we set the impact of the pandemic  on nonfinancial corporations in sector s as 
a function of two factors: ( 1) whether the related good or service is essential, and ( 2) 
whether it can be consumed remotely. 
If we assume a multiplicative relation,6 we get: 
𝐼𝑃𝑠 =
1
𝐸𝑆𝑠 𝑥 𝑅𝐸𝑠 (1) 
where 𝐼𝑃𝑠 refers to the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic in sector s, and 𝐸𝑆𝑠 and 𝑅𝐸𝑠 are 
indexes measuring how essential the good or service provided by sector s is and how much 
it can be consumed remotely, respectively. Sectors with higher values  of 𝐼𝑃𝑠 see a higher 
impact on their revenues, while sectors providing essential goods or services and those that 
can be consumed remotely are less affected.7 
 Moving from the sectoral impact to the impact on total nonfinancial corporations, we 
compute the weighted average of the impacts in different sectors: 
𝐼𝑃𝑁𝐹𝐶= ∑ 𝐼𝑃𝑠 𝑥 
𝐺𝑉𝐴𝑠
∑ 𝐺𝑉𝐴𝑠𝑆
𝑠=1
𝑆
𝑠=1  (2) 
where 𝐼𝑃𝑁𝐹𝐶 denotes the impact of the pandemic on nonfinancial corporations in a given 
economy, 𝐼𝑃𝑠 is the impact of the pandemic in sector s and GVAs refers to the gross value 
added of sector s, which is used to compute weights of the different sectors in an economy. 
A third factor to consider in the computation of the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic o n 
nonfinancial corporations, which is missing from Equation 2, refers to how each sector is 
interconnected with others: the more interconnected a sector is, the stronger the spillovers 
to other sectors and the larger the potential impact on financial stability. For example, if real 
 
6 The impact with an additive relation would be dependent on the good or service being consumed remotely or 
being essential, while with a multiplicative relation , both conditions need to be met to have low impact. This 
explains our preference for a multiplicative relation. 
7 Particularly in the case of goods or services to be provided remotely, there can be substantial tensions within 
sectors, with nonfinancial corporations more apt  to operate remotely gaining market share at the expense of 
those less developed from a technological point of view. In our analysis, we stop at the level of sector, not 
considering these intrasectoral tensions. 
106
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
estate sectors are severely affected and found to have unaddressed vulnerabilities, the 
subsequent related shock can propagate to households (through a negative wealth effect) 
and to financial intermediaries (banks through collat eral values and direct exposures, 
investment funds through the positions of real estate funds, and insurance corporations and 
pension funds through holding of real estate assets). For the purposes of our analysis though, 
we do not consider these second-round effects. 
B. An Estimation of the Asymmetric Impact of the COVID -19 Pandemic on 
Nonfinancial Corporations 
To illustrate the heterogenous impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had across the world, 
depending on the structure of national economies, we compute  the impact of the pandemic 
according to Equation 2. 
Starting with the identification of essential activities, we follow the approach by Del Rio -
Chanona et al. (2020) and use the identification made by the Italian government in its decree 
of March 22, 2020 (Italian Government 2020).8 Then, for the large sectors (at the level of 
one-letter NACE industry classification codes), we compute 𝐸𝑆𝑠 as the number of activities 
referred to as essential by the Italian government divided by the total number of activities in 
that sector. We use four-letter NACE codes for these purposes and exclude activities carried 
out by the public sector (O : public administration and defen se; compulsory social security; 
P: education; Q : human health and social work activities) , activities related to financial 
services (K: financial and insurance services), and those with an unclear economic relevance 
(T: activities of households as employers; undifferentiated goods - and services-producing 
activities of households for own use; U : activities of extraterritorial organi zations and 
bodies). 
As a result, we compute an index of the degree to which each sector is essential for the 
economy, on a scale from 0 to 1, with higher values being associated with the sector being 
fully essential (Figure 1). We observe first an important heterogeneity, as together with 
several sectors performing essential activities (five of 15), four sectors obtain the minimum 
possible score. 
To compute which goods and services can be provided and consumed remotely, we consider 
the degree to which it is possible for a potential customer to consume the good or service 
from home. We attribute a value of 1 to those sectors in which goods or services can be 
consumed from home without any need of substantial adjustments . Given the variety of 
activities included in the main NACE categories, the assessment made below in Figure 1 must 
be taken as an approximation, with an important role played by judgement. 
  
 
8 The Italian government’s decree of March 22, 2020, called for the suspension of productive activities, except 
for those sectors considered essential. 
107
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 1: Goods and Services Considered Essential (blue bars) and That Can Be 
Consumed Remotely (yellow bars) 
 
Notes: The blue bars show the ratio between the number of sectors mentioned as essential in the decree of the 
Italian government of March 22, 2020, and the total number of sectors, at four-letter detail, in each of the main 
sectoral divisions in the NACE code. Higher values represent that the sector is performing activities perceived 
as more essential. The yellow bars represent the degree to which the representative good or service provi ded 
by each sector can be consumed remotely in an easy manner. 
Sources: Italian Government 2020; author’s elaboration. 
To calculate the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic for each sector according to Equation 2, 
we replace those values of 0 for 0.01, to avoid getting undetermined expressions. Figure 28 
in Appendix C shows the results per sector. 
Given that the weight of the s ectors in national economies varies across countries, the 
COVID-19 pandemic has had and will have an asymmetric al impact across countries. To 
illustrate this point, we use the data published by Eurostat on gross value added by NACE 
codes for the euro area economies at the end of 2019 .9 The left panel of Figure 2 shows the 
impact of the COVID -19 pandemic on nonfinancial corporations in euro area economies 
according to Equation (2), weighting the different sectors in terms of gross value added. 
There is substantial cross-country heterogeneity, as those countries most affected show an 
impact almost twice as large as countries least affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The right 
panel of Figure 2 compares these impacts with the change in real GDP between the end of 
2019 and the third quarter of 2020, finding a clear negative relationship. 
 
9 There are fewer sectors reported by Eurostat than in the main NACE categories. To compute Figure 2, we  
made some adjustments, as detailed in Appendix C. 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
108
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 2: Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Nonfinancial Corporations in the Euro 
Area 
 
Notes: The left panel shows the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic in each country, according to the impacts 
defined in Equation (2) and the weight of each sector in the national gross value added. The right  panel 
compares this impact with the real GDP growth rate during the first three quarters of 2020 in volumes. No data 
for Slovakia. 
Sources: Eurostat 2022a; author’s elaboration. 
C. Households: Impact Determined by Wages and Consumption 
In principle, only those households that have lost their job s as a result of the COVID -19 
pandemic can experience a large decline in their inflows while other households may be less 
affected and may even increase their net worth (and savings) in view of the lower 
consumption opportunities. Amid workers, those with a temporary contract (typicall y the 
positions with lowest remuneration and employing the younger generations) face the 
greatest risk of losing their jobs. Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2020) finds that the hardest-hit 
occupations are those with relatively low flexibility in terms of subs titutability with remote 
work and higher social contact intensity, which tend to be associated with relatively poorer 
individuals (in terms of both wage and liquid wealth). Del Rio-Chanona et al. (2020) classifies 
industries as essential or nonessential and constructs a Remote Labor Index, measuring the 
ability of different occupations to work from home .10 Sectors such as transport are more 
likely to have output constrained by demand shocks while manufacturing, mining , and 
services are more likely to be constrained by supply shocks. Entertainment, restaurants, and 
tourism face both large supply and demand shocks. At the occupation level, the authors  
confirm that high -wage professions are relatively immune from adverse s upply- and 
demand-side shocks while low-wage jobs are much more vulnerable.  
To understand the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the household sector, it is necessary 
to consider also the potential loss of value of assets on the balance sheet of the sector.11 The 
value of bonds and equities of nonfinancial corporations may decrease as a result of the fall 
 
10 Barrot, Grassi, and Sauvagnat (2020) offers a similar index but with a smaller breakdown by occupations. 
11 This dynamic appears also in the case of nonfinancial corporations, although with less intensity. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
R² = 0.5284
-12%
-10%
-8%
-6%
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
109
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 14 ---
in consumption, affecting those households holding these financial instruments directly or 
indirectly (through investment funds or, more importantly, ins urance and pension 
products). In addition to these securities, real estate is the largest asset on the balance sheet 
of households and is usually associated with a large liability (mortgage loans). A drop in the 
value of real estate can thus have dramatic consequences for the financial soundness of 
households. 
Those households losing their jobs and facing limited unemployment insurance may witness 
a reduction of their inflows that is larger than their ability to reduce consumption of 
nonessential goods. In addition to existing unemployment benefits and the indemnities to be 
paid for the extinction of a labor contract, many governments have taken measures 
supporting workers in the form of shared payment of wages combined with temporal breaks 
in the work. Policy measures for households have been targeting the protection of those jobs 
at risk (through furlough or tax reliefs, for example) and the avoidance of default in loan 
repayments for the most vulnerable borrowers (essentially through loan moratoria). 
In aggregated terms, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on households seems to operate 
in both directions. On the one hand, there is a decrease in wages deriv ing from the 
adjustments by employers in their workforce s, but on the other hand, consumption is 
decreasing significantly, given the difficulty in maintaining previous levels of economic 
activity, and precautionary savings are increasing. Besides, accumulated net worth should 
be able to absorb losses derived from the COVID -19 pandemic. However, the aggrega tion 
hides the cross -sectoral heterogeneity of the financial soundness of households, as those 
with higher income tend to have higher net worth and be less indebted.12 
We define the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on households as a function of the share of 
workforce affected by the decrease in employment: 
𝐼𝑃𝐻 = ∑ 1
𝐸𝑆𝑠 𝑥 𝑅𝐸𝑠
𝑆
𝑠=1  𝑥 
𝑒𝑠
𝑒  (3) 
where 𝐼𝑃𝐻 refers to the impact of the pandemic on households, es is the number of employees 
in sector s, e is the total number of employees in nonfinancial corporations, and 𝐸𝑆𝑠 and 𝑅𝐸𝑠 
are indexes measuring how essential the good or service provided by sector s is and how 
much they can be consumed remotely, as defined in Section III.A. 
As a continuation of the example in the previous section, we  use data on compensation of 
employees by sector as published by Eurostat to compute the parameter es and then calculate 
the impact of the pandemic on households across euro area countries, as per Equation (3). 
Figure 3 shows the resulting impact. Given the similarities between Equation (2) and 
Equation (3) (obvious , given the close interrelations between the financial soundness of 
 
12 For a detailed analysis of the household sector in the euro area, please refer to Household Finance and 
Consumption Network (2020). 
110
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
households and nonfinancial corporations through employment relations), the ranking of 
countries is very similar to the one in the left panel of Figure 2. 
Figure 3: Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Households of the Euro Area 
 
Notes: The blue bars show the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic in each country, according to the impacts 
defined in Equation (3) on the basis of t he compensation of employees reported for each sector of activity. No 
data for France, Germany, and Slovakia. 
Sources: Eurostat 2022a; author’s elaboration. 
D. The Nature and Extent of Government Support  
The COVID -19 pandemic, particularly as a result of the  long period of reduced economic 
activity, has triggered an ambitious policy response by governments around the world since 
2020. Government support measures have mainly targeted households and nonfinancial 
corporations, protecting their main sources of in flows (wages and sales). Loan guarantees 
are important to ensure that nonfinancial corporations keep their access to bank loans to 
meet their financing needs, which in a pandemic context could also cover their working 
capital. Loan moratoria seek to provide relief to those borrowers that have seen a substantial 
decline in their inflows by postponing the payments related to their bank loans. Other types 
of support measures comprise tax reliefs, equity injections , or direct grants to the most 
affected segments in the real economy. The other side of these ambitious support measures 
implies an increase in government deficits, which are expected to persist for some time. 
In addition to government support measures , automatic stabilizers are at work to support 
the real economy during the crisis. For households, unemployment benefits provide inflows 
to workers who have lost their jobs as a result of the pandemic, and the lower generation of 
rents also imply that less taxe s will be collected by the government. Nonfinancial 
corporations reporting losses for the year 2020 would not pay income taxes, for example. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
111
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 16 ---
Considering the stylized balance sheets and flows statements of our economy, it is worth 
noting that loan moratoria do not imply any expense or transfer for the government, as they 
represent a deferral of interest payments over time. Loan moratoria involve mainly banks 
and borrowers, with a small role played by the government. In the case of loan guarantees, 
the government needs to intervene only if the borrower defaults in its payments to banks. 
So, the transfer from the government to banks is conditional to the default event of the 
borrower. If the borrower does not default, there is no impact for the government. In 
addition to the automatic stabilizers, tax reliefs and direct grants do have an impact on 
government flows and increase its deficit. Equity injections also determine a transfer from 
the government to nonfinancial corporations, but in this case , the governme nt takes a 
participation in the nonfinancial corporation (it owns it, at least partially), which can 
generate inflows, in the form of dividends, in the future. 
In Europe, the European Banking Authority ( EBA) and the European Systemic Risk Board 
(ESRB) have looked at the nature and uptake of the support measures taken by governments 
(EBA 2020a; ESRB 2021a). Loan guarantees have been used mostly by nonfinancial 
corporations while loan moratoria have benefited borrowers in the household sector in a 
larger proportion than nonfinancial corporations. Large heterogeneity in the design of the 
measures across countries, also reaching the uptake of them , has been observed. While 
cross-country differences may seem small (for example, loan guarantees for 70% of the loan 
or for the full loan , or covering only two years or the whole maturity of the loan), they can 
have important effects on their effectiveness to address stress in the real economy. 
It is beyond our scope to discuss the adequacy of government measures or their effectiveness 
in detail. However, as we see later in Section IV, the size and the effectiveness of government 
measures can strongly mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy.  
IV. From the Impact on the Real Economy to Nonperforming 
Loans 
In the previous section, we separately analyzed the channels through which the pandemic 
can impact households and nonfinancial corporations, and we would like ultimately to assess 
the resilience of the banking system to an increase in NPLs. In this section, we link these two 
important issues. 
We start with a framework for the default of a nonfinancial corporation or a household on 
its bank loan payments. We do so by looking at the main items in the flow statements. In a 
second step, we compute the amount of new NPLs caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in the 
euro area. In that process, we design several scenarios for the evolution of the pandemic 
during 2021, considering various sizes of government support. We finish with an analysis of 
corporate insolvencies and how they may affect NPLs in the household sector, as a result of 
job destruction directly caused by these insolvencies. 
112
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
A. Conditions for the Default of Bank Loan Payments by Nonfinancial Corporations 
and Households 
Based on its balance shee t and the inflows and outflows, we consider that a nonfinancial 
corporation i would not pay back its loans if: 
𝐼𝐿𝑖 > 𝑆𝑖 𝑥 (1−𝐼𝑃𝑠̂)+𝑇𝑅𝑖 +𝐼𝐹𝑖 −𝑂𝐹𝑖 +𝑆𝐹𝐴𝑖 (4) 
where IL refers to the interest paid on loans, S to the sales, 𝐼𝑃𝑠̂ to the impact of the pandemic 
on the sector of activity of the nonfinancial corporation, TR to transfers from the government, 
IF to inflows, OF to outflows, and SFA to inflows from the sale of fixed assets. 
The interest of the loans is determined by the volume of loans in the liabilities side of the 
balance sheet and by the interest rate of the loans. If we define the debt ratio as the share of 
debt over total assets, then Equation (4) can be expressed as: 
𝐷𝑅𝑖 >
1
𝑟𝑖𝑥(
𝑆𝑖 𝑥 (1−𝐼𝑃𝑠̂)
 𝑇𝐴𝑖 +
𝑇𝑅𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 +
𝐼𝐹𝑖−𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 +
𝑆𝐹𝐴𝑖
 𝑇𝐴𝑖 ) (5) 
where, in addition to the variables defined above, DR refers to the debt ratio, TA to total 
assets, and r to the interest rate of the loans. 
Operating further, we can express the same condition as in Equation (5) with th e impact of 
the pandemic on the left side of the inequality: 
𝐼𝑃𝑠̂>
𝑇𝐴𝑖
𝑆𝑖  𝑥 (
𝑇𝑅𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 +
𝑆𝑖+𝐼𝐹𝑖−𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 +
𝑆𝐹𝐴𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 −(𝐷𝑅𝑖 𝑥 𝑟𝑖)) (6) 
Together with the impact of the pandemic, the main factors driving the recognition of NPLs 
are the exi sting indebtedness of the nonfinancial corporation ( that is , its debt ratio), the 
interest rate paid on the stock of loans, the transfers received from the government, and the 
ability to dispose of fixed assets to generate inflows. 
Looking at the government support, the main measures are loan moratoria, loan guarantees, 
and direct transfers. The first effort implies that there is no interest payment due, so the loan 
cannot become nonperforming. Loan guarantees ensure that there are additional loans to 
finance the operations of the nonfinancial corporation, thus increasing its debt ratio and its 
inflows. Finally, direct transfers are seen in Equation (6) as an increase in the term TRi. 
Considering that there are N nonfinancial corporations in a sector, we can identify a number 
I of them that would fulfil Equation (6) and then default on their loans. Consequently, at the 
level of the sector s, the new arising NPLs would be equal to: 
𝑁𝑃𝐿𝑠 = ∑ 𝑇𝐿𝑖𝐼
𝑖=1  (7) 
where 𝑁𝑃𝐿𝑠 refers to the additional amount of nonperforming loans and TL to total loans. 
113
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 18 ---
Similarly, NPLs arise in the household sector if the following condition is met: 
𝐷𝑅𝑗 >
𝑊𝑗 𝑥 (1−𝐼𝑃𝐻̂)+𝑇𝑅𝑗+𝐼𝐹𝑗−𝑂𝐹𝑗+𝑆𝐴𝑗
𝑇𝐴𝑗 𝑥 𝑟𝑗  (8) 
where 𝐷𝑅𝑗 refers to the debt ratio of a household j, W to the wages received by that 
household, 𝐼𝑃𝐻̂ to the impact of the pandemic on the household sector, TR to transfers from 
the government, IF to inflows, OF to outflows, SA to the inflows derived from the sale of assets 
on the balance sheet of households (real estate, financial assets, pension and insurance 
rights, and other assets), TA to total assets, and r to the interest rate of household loans. 
In Equation (8), we also need to account for the lower consumption of households, which 
should decrease their outflows. We then introduce the impact of the pandemic on 
nonfinancial corporations as follows: 
𝐷𝑅𝑗 >
𝑊𝑗 𝑥 (1−𝐼𝑃𝐻̂)+𝑇𝑅𝑗+𝐼𝐹𝑗−( 𝐶𝑂𝑗 𝑥 (1−(𝛽 𝑥 𝐼𝑃𝑁𝐹𝐶̂ )))−𝑂𝑂𝐹𝑗+𝑆𝐴𝑗
𝑇𝐴𝑗 𝑥 𝑟𝑗  (9) 
where, in addition to the variables defined for Equation 8, 𝐼𝑃𝑁𝐹𝐶̂  refers to the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic on the total sector of nonfinancial corporations, 𝛽 is a coefficient related 
to the reduction in consumption stemming from the impact of the pandemic on nonfinancial 
corporations, and OOF refers to outflows other than consumption. 
We rearrange Equation (9) to bring the impact of the pandemic to the left  side of the 
inequality: 
𝐼𝑃𝐻̂> 1+
𝐼𝐹𝑗
𝑊𝑗 −
 𝐶𝑂𝑗
 𝑊𝑗 −
𝑂𝑂𝐹𝑗
 𝑊𝑗 +
𝐶𝑂𝑗 𝑥 𝛽 𝑥 𝐼𝑃𝑁𝐹𝐶̂
 𝑊𝑗 +
𝑇𝑅𝑗
𝑊𝑗 +
𝑆𝐴𝑗
 𝑊𝑗 −(𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑗 𝑥 
𝑟𝑗
𝑊𝑗) (10) 
The equation above takes into account the financial soundness with which households 
entered the pandemic (seen through their level of debt) as well as the difference between 
inflows and outfl ows. Government support measures for households work by sustaining  
their wages (through temporal compensation schemes) and as transfers (for example, 
unemployment benefits). 
Considering that there are N households in the economy, we can identify a number J of them 
that would fulfil Equation (10). Consequently, new NPLs related to household loans would 
be equal to: 
𝑁𝑃𝐿𝐻 = ∑ 𝑇𝐿𝑗𝐽
𝑗=1  (11) 
where 𝑁𝑃𝐿𝐻 refers to the amount of NPLs from loans to households and TL to total loans. At 
the level of the economy, the total amount of NPLs is the sum of those arising from 
nonfinancial corporations and those from the household sector: 
𝑁𝑃𝐿= ∑ 𝑁𝑃𝐿𝑠𝑆
𝑠=1 +𝑁𝑃𝐿𝐻 (12) 
114
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 19 ---
B. Estimating the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Nonfinancial Corporations in 
the Euro Area 
We compute the impact of the pandemic on euro area nonfinancial corporations using short-
term statistics prepared by Eurostat over the period March to December 2020  (Eurostat 
2022c).13 Short-term statistics provide an index of turnover by main NACE codes. We need 
to slightly adjust the sectoral division of nonfinancial corporations we have used so far (see 
Table 8 in Appendix C). 
The impact of the COVID -19 pandemic over each sector is co mputed as lost turnover since 
February 2020, according to the following expression: 
𝐼𝑃𝑠̂= (
∑ (𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑠−𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑠̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅)𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 2020
𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ 2020
∑ 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑠𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ 2019
𝐹𝑒𝑏𝑟𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑦 2020
) (13) 
where 𝐼𝑃𝑠̂ represents the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sector s, 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑠 the value of 
the index according to the short -term indicators by Eurostat for sector s, and 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑠̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ the 
value taken by the index in February 2020. 
Figure 4 shows that the largest impacts are found in the sectors of accommodation and food 
service activities, administrative and support service activities, arts, entertainment and 
recreation, and other services activities.14 Using the weight of each sector on the total gross 
value added by nonfinancial corporations, the total impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the 
euro area is –12.21%. That result implies that the pandemic, between March and December 
2020, led to a decrease of 12.21% in the turnover of euro area nonfinancial corporations, 
based on the turnover of the previous 12 months (March 2019 to February 2020). 
 
13 Sectoral annual accounts are available only for the euro area. Although Eurostat publish es data for the 
European Union (EU) as a whole as well, we are computing the impact of the pandemic on the euro area to 
cross-check our results with the sectoral balance sheets in Appendix A.  
14 For a comparison with our impact of the pandemic according to Equation (1), see App endix C. 
115
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 4: Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Turnover of Nonfinancial 
Corporations 
 
Notes: Data are seasonally  and calendar adjusted. The blue bars represent the change in total turnover per 
sector, computed according to Equation (13). See Appendix C for the mapping of sectors in Eurostat data. Data 
for sectors H, J, M , and N for October, November , and December 20 20 are computed as the average of the 
observations for Spain, France, Latvia, Luxembourg, Portugal, Slovenia, Slovakia , and Finland, as Eurostat had 
not published the euro area aggregate in April 2021. The chart on the right represents the contribution of each 
sector to the overall impact, using weights of gross value added. A stands for agriculture, forestry, and fishing; 
B for mining and quarrying; C for manufacturing; D for electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply; E for 
water supply, sewerage, and waste management and remediation activities; F for construction; G for wholesale 
and retail trade and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycle s; H for transporting and storage; I for 
accommodation and food service activities; J for information and communication  services; L for real estate 
activities; M for professional, scientific , and technical activities; N for administrative and support service 
activities; R for arts, entertainment, and recreation; and S for other services activities. 
Source: Eurostat 2022c; author’s analysis. 
Up to this point, we have implicitly assumed that turnover returned to the level of February 
2020 in January 2021, an assumption that unfortunately did not hold. The assessment above 
offers a partial view of the impact, and it is necessary to complement it by taking into account 
the evolution of the pandemic from January 2021. 
To that purpose, we compute first the stringency index by the University of Oxford, which 
measures the severity of the health -related measures taken by governments to contain the 
COVID-19 pandemic  (Hale et al. 2020) . We then calculate the correlation between the 
median stringency index for euro area countries (taking the average values for each month) 
and the turnover of the different sectors of activity, as reported by Eurostat. These 
correlations are negative for all sectors of activity and, in some of them until September 
2020, close to –1 ( Figure 5 ). The decrease of correlations when we consider data up to 
December 2020 may suggest that nonfinancial corporations were able to adjust to the 
pandemic and were, thus, not so much affected as in the first half of 2020. 
-45%
-40%
-35%
-30%
-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0% A, -0.30%B, -0.16%
C, -2.41%
D, -0.02% E, -0.02%
F, -0.59%G, -0.48%
H, -1.12%
I, -3.37%
J, -0.01%L, -1.24%
M, -0.30%
N, -1.38% R + S, 
-0.80%
-14%
-12%
-10%
-8%
-6%
-4%
-2%
0%
Contribution to total change in turnover
116
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 5: Correlations between the Stringency Index and the Short-Term Indicators 
by Eurostat 
 Correlation 
Sector Up to Sept 
2020 
Up to Dec 
2020 
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing –0.96 –0.74 
Mining and quarrying –0.88 –0.64 
Manufacturing –0.89 –0.60 
Electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply –0.65 –0.39 
Water supply, sewerage, and waste management and 
remediation activities –0.65 –0.39 
Construction –0.73 –0.58 
Wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor vehicles and 
motorcycles –0.78 –0.60 
Transporting and storage –0.96 –0.74 
Accommodation and food service activities –0.94 –0.94 
Information and communication services –0.43 –0.48 
Real estate activities –0.73 –0.58 
Professional, scientific, and technical activities –0.87 –0.43 
Administrative and support service activities –0.93 –0.86 
Arts, entertainment, and recreation –0.93 –0.86 
Other services activities –0.93 –0.86 
Notes: Correlations between the values of the stringency index (median of monthly data across euro area 
countries) and of the short-term indicators by Eurostat, considering two periods of time: from January 2020 to 
September 2020, and from January 2020 to December 2020. Some sectors are missing in the Eurostat database 
and have been mapped as shown in Appendix C. 
Sources: Eurostat 2022c; Hale et al. 2020; author’s elaboration. 
We estimate a simple linear regression where the turnover index is the dependent variable, 
and the stringency index is the independent variable.  
𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑠 = 𝛼𝑠 +(𝛽𝑠 𝑥 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑡)+ 𝜀𝑡
𝑠 (14) 
where 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡
𝑠 represents the turnover index after December 2020, 𝛼𝑠 the intersect, 𝛽𝑠 is the 
coefficient associated with the stringency index, Stringencyt the value taken by the stringency 
117
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 22 ---
index, and 𝜀𝑡
𝑠 the error term. The resulting equation for each sector allows us to forecast the 
evolution of the turnover index over 2021, based on the values taken by the stringency index. 
We define the following scenarios for the evolution of the pandemic in 2021 (Figure 6): 
Mild. The stringency index remains in the values of December 2020 during January, 
February, and March, then decreases linearly until reaching the value zero in June 2021. 
We can use this scenario as a floor for our estimations. 
Severe. The stringen cy index remains in the values of December 2020 during January, 
February, March, and April and then decreases linearly until reaching the value zero in 
December 2021. The slower reduction in the stringency index under this scenario can 
be seen also in the context of a slower -than-expected vaccination process or the 
appearance of new mutations of the virus. 
Spanish flu. Like the situation in 1918 –1919, the pandemic hits in three waves  (CDC 
2018),  the third one occurring between March and April 2021, with the stringency index 
taking the same value as in April 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic follows closely that of 
the Spanish flu and ends in December 2021. 
Lockdown. There is a two -month lockdown in Feb ruary and March 2021, with the 
stringency index at its maximum value , then the pandemic abates quickly through 
December 2021. This scenario can be compared with the others to see the impact of 
strict lockdowns on economic activities over the long term.  
  
118
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 6: Stringency Index over 2021 in the Four Scenarios 
 
Notes: Each line represents the evolution of the stringency index over 2021, as per the assumptions made in 
the description of each of the four scenarios. 
Source: Hale et al. 2020; author’s analysis. 
We then compute Equation (13) , extending the denominator until the period when the 
stringency index is back to zero (June 2021 and December 2021). As observed in the left 
panel of Figure 7, the decrease in total sales is slightly above 16% for the mild scenario (4 
percentage points more than at the end of December 2020), almost 21% for the severe 
scenario (doubling the loss until December 2020) , and slightly above 22% for the Spanish 
flu scenario. The lockdown scenario lead s to a decline i n sales of circa 19.5%, less than the 
relatively similar severe and Spanish flu scenarios. That  outcome could be seen as pointing 
out to the benefits of strong responses to the pandemic, in opposition to a prolonged 
pandemic where forceful measures are not taken. When the impact is defined in terms of the 
accumulated net worth of nonfinancial corporations (using the data in Appendix A), the three 
scenarios extending the pandemic until December 2021 consume about 30% of accumulated 
net worth for the aggregate of nonfinancial corporations (right panel of Figure 7).  
  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Mild Severe Spanish Flu Lockdown
119
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 24 ---
Figure 7: Decrease in Turnover of Nonfinancial Corporations in the Four Scenarios 
for the COVID-19 Pandemic over 2021 
 
Notes: The left panel shows the change in turnover under the four scenarios (and up to December 2020) as a 
percentage of the turnover between March 2019 and February 2020. The yellow bars in the right  panel show 
the size of the lost turnover as a share of the accumulated net worth on the balance sheet of nonfinancial 
corporations at the end of 2019. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
C. Estimating the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Households in the Euro Area 
To estimate the impact of the pandemic on households, we use data from Eurostat on weekly 
absences from work in the E uropean Union (EU; excluding the United Kingdom).15 Figure 8 
shows the evolution of the weekly absence s from work during 2018, 2019 , and 2020. In 
2020, many more absences from work were reported in March, April, and May, with a second 
smaller peak toward the end of the year. 
  
 
15 See Eurostat (2022b). Eurostat data do not show an aggregate for the euro area, so we use the EU as a proxy. 
-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
Up to
December
2020 Mild Severe
Spanish
Flu Lockdown
-35%
-30%
-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
Up to
December
2020 Mild Severe
Spanish
Flu Lockdown
120
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 8: Weekly Absences from Work in the EU 
 
Notes: Each line represents the weekly absences from work over the years 2018, 2019 , and 2020, as reported 
by Eurostat for the EU 27. The last observation is week 52, whereas 2020 had 53 weeks. Data for week 53 has 
not been taken into account in our calculations. 
Sources: Eurostat 2022b; author’s elaboration. 
On that basis, we define the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic on households as absences 
from work in 2020 divided by the average of those reported in the two previous years (2018 
and 2019): 
𝐼𝑃𝐻̂= −(
∑ 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠2020−
(∑ 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠2019+∑ 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠2018𝑊52
𝑊01
𝑊52
𝑊01 )
2
𝑊52
𝑊01
(∑ 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠2019+∑ 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠2018𝑊52
𝑊01
𝑊52
𝑊01 )
2
) (15) 
where 𝐼𝑃𝐻̂ refers to the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic on households, 𝑊01 to the first 
week of the year, 𝑊52 to the last week of the year, and Absences 2018, Absences 2019, and 
Absences2020 to the weekly absences from work for years 2018, 2019, and 2020, respectively. 
Absences from work were 31.68% higher in 2020 , and we can attribute this increase to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. That is the direct impact of the pandemic on households, without taking 
into account important mitigants present in Equation (10): the extent of government 
support (including unemployment benefits) and the reduction in consumption derived from 
lower economic activity. 
D. Estimating the Increase of Nonperforming Loans from Nonfinancial Corporations 
in the Euro Area 
In this section, we provide an answer to the question of how many NPLs can be expected to 
arise from the economic shock caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, once the positive effects of 
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
2018 2019 2020
121
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 26 ---
the support measures taken by governments are taken into account. We base our estimations 
on Equation (6) and Equation (10) for nonfinancial corporations and households, respectively. 
Given our focus on the euro area, we consider two important additional points on nonfinancial 
corporations: (1) bank lending is the main source of finance for nonfinancial corporations, 
particularly if compared with the US (Pagano et al. 2014), so we do not consider other market-
based sources of funding; and (2) small and medium-size enterprises play a fundamental role 
in the European economies, in terms of production, employment, investment, and value added 
(European Commission 2019). 
Starting with nonfinancial corporations, Figure 9  summarizes our main assumptions. 
Because the results for the severe, Spanish flu, and lockdown scenarios are quite similar, we 
consider only the severe scenario. For interest rates, we assume a value of 2%, based on the 
monetary financial institutions interest rates ( MIR) database of the European Central Bank 
(ECB 2021b). The ratio between total assets and sales is calculated from the balance sheet of 
the euro area economy, as in Appendix A. 
For the debt ratio and the total inflows and outflows divided by total assets, we use data from 
the Bank for the Accounts of Companies Harmonized  (BACH) database of the European 
Committee of Central Balance Sheet Data Office s (ECCBSO).16 We use data from more than 
2.2 million nonfinancial corporati ons located in Austria, Belgium, Germany, Spain, Italy, 
Luxembourg, Portugal, and Slovakia with a reference date of the end of 2018 (data for 2019 
is still being updated ). These are the countries with the highest coverage in the BACH 
database. The first and third quartiles and the median of each ratio are disclosed by country. 
We calculate the median across countries to get to an approximation of the value for the euro 
area. 
  
 
16 Bank for the Account s of Companies Harmoni zed (BACH) is a database of aggregated and harmonized 
accounting data of nonfinancial incorporated enterprises of 12 European countries, based on national 
accounting standards (individual annual accounts) and maintained by the E uropean Committee of Central 
Balance Sheet Data Offices. For further information, see Bach Working Group (2015). 
122
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 9: Values Attributed to Main Variables in the Estimation of NPLs Arising from 
the COVID-19 Pandemic in Relation to Loans to Nonfinancial Corporations 
Variable Value Comments 
𝐼𝑃𝑠̂ Depends on 
sector As estimated in Section IV.B 
𝑆𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 0.1096 Calculated from the amounts reported in Appendix A 
𝑇𝑅𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 From 0 to 
0.15 
Seen as the most plausible amounts. Values greater than 
10% of total assets imply transfers from the government 
of more than EUR 6 trillion 
𝑆𝑖 +𝐼𝐹𝑖 −𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖  Depends on 
sector 
Ratio of net operating profit to total assets, from the BACH 
database, estimated to follow a normal distribution 
𝑆𝐹𝐴𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖  From 0 to 
0.05  
𝐷𝑅𝑖 Depends on 
sector 
Sum of the ratios of current interest-bearing borrowings 
to total assets and noncurrent interest-bearing 
borrowings to total assets, from the BACH database, 
estimated to follow a normal distribution. We exclude 
amounts due to suppliers (typically the most relevant 
short-term debt of nonfinancial corporations). Through 
supplier relationships, nonfinancial corporations are 
importantly interconnected across jurisdictions and 
across sectors, the car industry being the clearest example 
(see, for example, Baldwin and Lopez‐Gonzalez 2015). 
𝑟𝑖 0.02 
Based on the Monetary Financial Institutions Interest Rate 
(MIR) Statistics of the ECB, the agreed interest rates for 
loans to nonfinancial corporations in the euro area, at all 
maturities, was 1.87% in December 2019. We round it up 
to 2% 
Source: Bach Working Group 2015; ECB 2021b; and author’s analysis. 
We assume that the ratio of net operating profit to total assets follows a normal distribution 
across nonfinancial corporations in a given sector, with the median as the mean, and the 
variance calculated from the interquartile range17: 
 
17 In a standard normal distribution (with mean equal to 0 and standard deviation equal to 1), the first and 
third quartiles are located at –0.67448 and +0.67448 respectively, leading to an interquartile range of 1.34896 
(rounded to 1.35). 
123
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 28 ---
𝑁𝑂𝑃
𝑇𝐴  ≈ 𝑁(𝑄2, (
𝑄3−𝑄1
1.35 )
2
) (16) 
where NOP refers to net operating profit, TA to total assets, and Q1, Q2, and Q3 to the first 
quartile, the median, and the third quartile, respectively. 
We make the same assumption for the ratio of current and noncurrent debt to total assets: 
𝐶𝐷+𝑁𝐶𝐷
𝑇𝐴  ≈ 𝑁(𝑄2, (
𝑄3−𝑄1
1.35 )
2
) (17) 
where CD refers to current debt and NCD to noncurrent debt. In this case, we truncate the 
range of values to be in the interval [0, 1], not allowing for debt to be larger than the total 
size of the balance sheet and not considering negative values of the ratio. These cases appear 
only at the left and right tails of the distribution, with low associated probabilities. 
Next, we assume that both normal distributions are related: Those firms showing lower 
values of the net operating profit to total assets are also having higher values of the debt 
ratio. Similarly, nonfinancial corporations with higher profitability also have lower 
associated values of the debt ratio. 
For each sector of activity, we attribute values to the transfers from the government and to 
the sale of fixed assets between 0 and 0.15, and between 0 and 0.05, respectively .18 There 
are thus 96 different combinations , and for each one, we calculate Equation (6) for 600 
values of the ratio of net operating profit to total assets and the related current and 
noncurrent debt to total assets. These 600 values range from 3 X to –3X the standard 
deviation, at intervals of 0.01.  
The increase in the rate of NPLs as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic is defined as the 
difference of the probability associated with the last value of the ratio of net operating profit 
to total assets for which Equation (6) holds and the same probabili ty assuming that the 
impact of the pandemic is zero: 
∆𝑁𝑃𝐿𝑠 = 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏[(
𝑆𝑖+𝐼𝐹𝑖−𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 )
∗
| 𝐼𝑃𝑠̂] −𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏[(
𝑆𝑖+𝐼𝐹𝑖−𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 )
∗
| 0] (18) 
where ∆𝑁𝑃𝐿𝑠 refers to the increase in the rate of NPLs in sector s, (
𝑆𝑖+𝐼𝐹𝑖−𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 )
∗
 to the first 
value of 
𝑆𝑖+𝐼𝐹𝑖−𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖  for which Equation (6) holds , and 𝐼𝑃𝑠̂ to the impact of the pandemic on 
sector s (Figure 10).  
  
 
18 Appendix A shows that nonfinancial corporations in the euro area received transfers amounting to about 1% 
of their total assets in 2019. Given their small size and to ease our calculations, such transfers  are not 
considered in our estimation. 
124
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 29 ---
Figure 10: Increase in the Rate of NPLs to Euro Area Nonfinancial Corporations from 
the COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
Notes: The diagonal line at the top of the chart  shows the relation between the ratio of net operating profit to 
total assets and the result of Equation (6), used to derive when a nonfinancial corporation would default on the 
loans, with and without pandem ic. The intersection of the two lines with the x -axis is then translated into the 
cumulative distribution function of a normal distribution for the ratio of net operating profit to total assets. The 
difference between the two associated cumulative probabil ities is estimated to be the increase in NPLs 
generated by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
Once the increase in the rate of NPLs is computed by sector, data from the EBA Risk 
Dashboard (EBA 2020b) on loans to nonfinancial corporations acc ording to NACE codes 
allows us to obtain the weight of each sector on lending to nonfinancial corporations in the 
euro area. Using these weights, we can obtain the increase in the rate of NPLs related to loans 
to nonfinancial corporations in the euro area.  
Figure 11 depicts the rate of nonperforming loans arising under the different combinations 
of transfers from the government and sales of fixed assets. A situation where no government 
𝐼𝑃 ̂− 𝑇𝐴𝑖
𝑆𝑖  𝑥 𝑇𝑅𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 + 𝑆𝑖+ 𝐼𝐹𝑖 − 𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 + 𝑆𝐹𝐴𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 − 𝐷𝑅𝑖 𝑥 𝑟𝑖
∗
 
𝑆𝑖 + 𝐼𝐹𝑖 − 𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖
∗
 
∆𝑁𝑃𝐿𝑠 
𝑆𝑖 +𝐼𝐹𝑖− 𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖  
𝑆𝑖 + 𝐼𝐹𝑖 − 𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖
∗
 𝑆𝑖 + 𝐼𝐹𝑖 − 𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖
∗
 
𝑆𝑖 + 𝐼𝐹𝑖 − 𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖
∗
 
𝐼𝑃𝑠̂ 
𝐼𝑃𝑠 = 0̂  
𝑆𝑖+ 𝐼𝐹𝑖− 𝑂𝐹𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖  
𝑃(𝑥) 
125
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 30 ---
support is available, and no fixed assets are sold leads to additional NPLs of 7.81% of loans 
to nonfinancial corporations (EUR 881 billion, according to data from Appendix A).  
Figure 11: Increase in the Rate of NPLs to Euro Area Nonfinancial Corporations from 
the COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
Notes: The y-axis shows the increase, as a percentage of total loans, in the rate of NPLs that would be triggered 
by the COVID -19 pandemic under different combinations of transfers from the government (x -axis) and 
disposal of assets ( see legend ). Data refers to the euro area. Sector J ( information and communication) is 
excluded as it shows a small positive impact of the pandemic, which would result in a reduction of NPLs. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
Government support measures are effective in reducing the amount of NPLs caused by the 
pandemic. When transfers from the government represent 10% of  total assets of 
nonfinancial corporations and in the absence of any action on the side of nonfinancial 
corporations, the additional NPLs are reduced to 3.28% (EUR 370 billion, according to data 
from Appendix A). However, it is necessary to put these amounts in perspective: transfers 
from the government sector of 10% of the total balance sheet of nonfinancial corporations 
in the euro area total more than EUR 4.3 trillion.19 As signaled in Section III.D, loan moratoria 
do not imply a transfer of resources from the government sector to nonfinancial 
corporations but indicate a suspension of interest payments. In this case, thus, 𝐼𝐿𝑖 is equal to 
zero. Given that our analysis also covers 2021 and as most loan moratoria in the euro area 
were set to expire throughout 2021 (affecting mostly households), we do not take loan 
moratoria into account in these estimates. In the case of loan guarantees, they could 
indirectly do so, as the transfer occurs with the intermediation of the banking sector. A more 
realistic scenario, based on ESRB (2021a) findings and considering the transfers made 
during 2019 ( about 1% of total assets, according to Appendix A), could then consider 
 
19 According to A ppendix A, the total balance sheet of euro area nonfinancial corporations amounted to EUR 
43.7 trillion at the end of 2019. 
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
0% 2% 4% 6% 8% 10% 12% 14%
0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
126
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 31 ---
government support  on the order of 2% of the size of the balance sheet, leading to an 
increase in NPLs of 7.07% (EUR 797 billion, according to data from Appendix A).20 
Figure 11 can be interpreted as showing an almost unavoidably large increase in NPLs as a 
result of the COVID -19 pandemic. To bring that increase close to zero, the effort of the 
government sector should be enormous, with transfers above EUR 5 trillion. The total size 
of the balance sheet of the government sector in the euro area was EUR 11.5 trillion at the 
end of 2019, as shown by Appendix A. 
Another alternative for nonfinancial corporations is to sell some of their assets, to generate 
additional inflows and compensate the drop of sales caused by the pandemic. This strategy 
entails a destruction of capital and, when sales occur simultaneously, can lead to fire sales 
and lower proceeds from these operations. Besides, the sales should be massive to have a 
real impact on the additional NPLs. 
As outlined in Section III.D, one of the key conditions for government support to mitigate the 
impact of the pandemic refers to its effectiveness. One way of addressing government 
programs’ effectiveness in practice is by providing more support to the most impacted 
sectors. 
Indeed, our previous calculatio ns implicitly assume a lineal distribution of government 
transfers across sectors regardless of how much they are impacted by the pandemic. But 
they are differently impacted: some sectors, such as  accommodation and food service  
activities, are heavily impa cted while others, such as  information and communication  
services, do not feel a large impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
In Section IV.B, we identified sectors I ( accommodation and food service activities), N 
(administrative and support service activities), R (Arts, entertainment, and recreation), and 
S ( other services activities) as those mostly affected by the pandemic, while sectors D 
(electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply), E ( water supply, sewerage, and waste 
management and re mediation activities), J ( information and communication  services) and 
M ( professional, scientific , and technical activities) were almost not affected. As an 
illustration of what can be achieved with a targeted used of government transfers, we can 
assume th at transfers of the government are fixed at 2% of the total balance sheet of 
nonfinancial corporations (EUR 874 billion) and that the transfers  are initially allocated to 
sectors with the lowest impact are distributed first to sector I ( accommodation and f ood 
service activities) until it reaches 15% of the total balance sheet, and then to sectors N 
(administrative and support service activities), R ( arts, entertainment, and recreation), and 
S (other services activities), as shown by Figure 12. So, government support effectively goes 
to the most affected sectors. 
 
20 If we consider also the  EUR 1.85 trillion of the European Central Bank’s Pandemic Emergency Purchase 
Programme (PEPP), the total s ize of government support exceeds 6% of total assets of nonfinancial 
corporations. We do not include the PEPP in our calculations as it is an indirect source of support.  
127
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 32 ---
Figure 12: Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Examples of Targeted Government 
Transfers to Most Affected Sectors 
 
Notes: The blue bars show government transfers of 2% of total assets for all sectors while the orange bars show 
an example of targeted government transfers to the most affected sectors, according to the severe scenario 
defined in Section IV.B. The impact of the pa ndemic under this scenario is shown by the grey dots, with 
reference to the right axis, with inverted values. A stands for agriculture, forestry, and fishing; B for mining and 
quarrying; C for manufacturing; D for electricity, gas, steam , and air condition ing supply; E for water supply, 
sewerage, and waste management and remediation activities; F for construction; G for wholesale and retail 
trade and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycle s; H for transporting and storage; I for accommodation and 
food servi ce activities; J for information and communication  services; L for real estate activities; M for 
professional, scientific, and technical activities; N for administrative and support service activities; R for arts, 
entertainment, and recreation; and S for other services activities. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
As shown by Figure 13, doing so brings the additional rate of NPLs to the same level as that 
associated with transfers  from the government equal to 4% of the total balance sheet of 
nonfinancial corporations. The difference implies having additional NPLs for EUR 797 billion 
or for EUR 736 billion. 
-0.9
-0.8
-0.7
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.10
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
A B C D E F G H I J L M N R S
Government transfers
Adjusted government transfers
Impact of COVID-19 pandemic (severe scenario)
128
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 33 ---
Figure 13: Increase in the Rate of NPLs to Euro Area Nonfinancial Corporations from 
the COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
 
Notes: The blue bars show the increase, in percentage points, in the rate of NPLs that would be triggered by the 
COVID-19 pandemic under different combinations of transfers from the government and assuming no disposal 
of assets. The orange bar shows the increase in the rate of NPLs in case government transfers are targeted to 
the sectors most affected by the pandemic. Data refers to the euro area. Sector J ( information and 
communication services) is excluded as it shows a positive impact from the pandemic, which would result in a 
reduction of NPLs. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
E. Estimating the Increase of Nonperforming Loans from Households in the Euro 
Area 
To compute the expected increase in NPLs from households, we use data from the 2017 wave 
of the ECB Household Finance and Consumption Survey (Household Finance and 
Consumption Network 2020), which covers the euro area and divides households according 
to the percentiles 20, 40, 60 80, and 90 of their income and net worth. To keep all percentiles 
of the same size, we exclude the 90 percentile and assume that households above it are equal 
to households between the 80 and 90 percentiles. The reference date for this data is 2017 , 
but these variables are not subject to sudden and large movements in the short term. 
While not being very granular, the ECB Household Finance and Consumption Survey allows 
a direct mapping to the variables in Equation (10), as shown in Figure 14. We consider the 
distribution of households according to their net wealth.  
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
Increase in rate of NPLs from pandemic
Increase in rate of NPLs from pandemic and efficient government measures
129
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 34 ---
Figure 14: Values Attributed to Main Variables in the Estimation of NPLs Arising from 
the COVID-19 Pandemic in Relation to Loans to Households 
Variable Value Comments 
𝐼𝑃𝐻̂ 0.3168 As estimated in Section IV.C 
𝐼𝐹𝑗 
Varies 
across 
percentiles 
Calculated as the difference between median gross 
household income, as reported in Table 10 of Household 
Finance and Consumption Network (2020), and wages, 
calculated as above 
𝑊𝑗 
Varies 
across 
percentiles 
From Appendix A, we compute the share of wages over 
total inflows and apply that share to the median gross 
household income, as reported in Table 10 of Household 
Finance and Consumption Network (2020) 
𝐶𝑂𝑗 
Varies 
across 
percentiles 
Median expenditures on food and on utilities, Table 11 of 
Household Finance and Consumption Network (2020) 
𝑂𝑂𝐹𝑗 
Varies 
across 
percentiles 
Comprising taxes, as reported in Appendix A, and 
attributed linearly across our five group of households 
𝛽 0.5 To account for intermediate consumption and 
consumption by the public sector 
𝐼𝑃𝑁𝐹𝐶̂  0.2074 As estimated in Section IV.B for the severe scenario 
𝑇𝑅𝑗 
Varies 
across 
percentiles 
Total amount taken from Appendix A and distributed 
exponentially starting with households with lowest net 
wealth 
𝑆𝐴𝑗 — At this stage, not considered 
𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑗 
Varies 
across 
percentiles 
Conditional mean of total debt, Table 7 of Household 
Finance and Consumption Network (2020) 
𝑟𝑗 0.025 Based on the ECB MIR database (0.0255 as of end 2019) 
Sources: ECB 2021b; Household Finance and Consumption Network 2020; author’s analysis. 
Considering that no additional transfers from governments are made and that households 
are not in need of selling some assets to maintain their financial position, the direct impact 
of the pandemic should not lead households to massively default on their loans (Figure 15). 
Across different groups of households depending on their net wealth, they have a wide buffer 
to absorb the related losses. An important factor to take into account are the social benefits 
in place in many European countries (for example, unemployment benefits), which partially 
shield household income from adverse shocks and mostly benefit households with lower net 
wealth. 
130
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 35 ---
Figure 15: Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Households According to Their Net 
Wealth 
  
Notes: The orange line represents the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on euro area households, as calculated 
in Section IV.C. The blue bars represent the values taken by the right -side of Equation (10). If blue bars were 
below the orange line, households could be seen at high risk of nonpayment of their loans. Households are 
sorted into five groups, depending on their levels of net wealth. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
While the direct impact of the COVID -19 pandemic and the potential wave of NPLs it 
generates can be expected to arise in the sector of nonfinancial corporations, households 
should not witness a widespread increase in NPLs. With the granularity provided by the ECB 
Household Finance and Consumption Survey, we do not find evidence suggesting a massi ve 
deterioration in the financial soundness of households across the euro area.  
Nonetheless, three important points are worth noting: 
The fact that the aggregated sector seems resilient to the COVID -19 pandemic does not 
exclude the possibility that the most vulnerable households can experience severe stress. 
According to Eurostat  (2022d), there are approximately 195 million households in the 
EU, so 5% of them suffering severe financial stress would mean that almost 10 million 
households are under severe stress. 
Government support comes as a cost to governments, which are going to see their 
indebtedness increase substantially. The impact of the COVID -19 pandemic on 
government debt sustainability is not under the scope of this paper, but it may be 
particularly large if economic recovery is not strong enough to allow for a 
discontinuation of the support measures in the medium term. 
Second-round effects derived from additional stress in nonfinancial corporations over 
2021 are not considered. For example, if reduced sales of nonfinancial corporations as a 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0-20 20-40 40-60 60-80 80-100
131
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 36 ---
result of the COVID -19 pandemic start having widespread consequences for their 
solvency, households working in the most affected nonfinancial corporations could lose 
their jobs and their main source of income.  
F. Second-Round Effects from Corporate Insolvencies 
We concluded in the previous section that the COVID-19 pandemic should not directly create 
a wave of NPLs in the household sector. However, households can be affected by massive 
corporate insolvencies trigger ed by the pandemic, as many of them would lose their main 
source of income within a short time. In this section, we look at the potential for massive 
corporate insolvencies and how that may affect NPLs in the household sector. Our main 
assumption in this s ection is that the additional nonfinancial corporations with negative 
equity file for insolvency and then fire their employees, who would lose their main source of 
income and, in turn, could default on their loan payments. 
Using data from Eurostat on the n umber of employees in the euro area per NACE sector  
(Eurostat 2022a) , we see that the sectors of nonfinancial corporations with the highest 
number of employees (manufacturing, and wholesale and retail trade) would in principle not 
be much affected by the C OVID-19 pandemic (Figure 1 6). The  most affected sector 
(accommodation and food service  activities) employs a relatively small proportion of 
workers in the EU, slightly above 5% of the total. 
  
132
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 37 ---
Figure 16: Total Employment per Sector (left side) and Impact of the COVID-19 
Pandemic (right side) 
 
Notes: The blue bars represent the percentage of employees in the euro area in each sector of nonfinancial 
corporations while the orange dots represent the impact of the pandemic (with values in reversed order)  
between March and December 2020, computed in Section IV.B. A stands for agriculture, forestry, and fishing; 
B for mining and quarrying; C for manufacturing; D for electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply; E for 
water supply, sewerage, and waste management and remediation activities; F for construction; G for wholesale 
and retail trade  and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycle s; H for transporting and storage; I for 
accommodation and food service activities; J for information and communica tion services; L for real estate 
activities; M for professional, scientific , and technical activities; N for administrative and support service 
activities; R for arts, entertainment, and recreation; and S for other services activities. 
Sources: Eurostat 2022a; author’s analysis. 
A nonfinancial corporation is under severe risk of insolvency when its accumulated net 
worth and the shares and other equity are negative (in other words, when the value of all the 
liabilities exceed the value of its assets). In the context of the shock the COVID-19 pandemic 
caused, that would imply that the inflows and outflows of 2020 should exceed their 
accumulated net worth and equity at the end of 2019: 
NWi +EQi < (Si x (1−IPŝ))+TRi +IFi −OFi −ILi +SFAi) (19) 
where NW refers to accumulated net worth, EQ to shares and other equity, S to sales, 𝐼𝑃𝑠̂ to 
the impact of the pandemic on the sector of activity s, TR to transfers from the government, 
IF to inflows, OF to outflows, IL to the interest paid on loans, and SFA to inflows from the sale 
of fixed assets. 
We regroup the terms in Equation (19) and get an expression as follows: 
𝑁𝑊𝑖+𝐸𝑄𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 < (
𝑆𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖𝑥 (−𝐼𝑃𝑠̂))+
𝑇𝑅𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 +
𝑆𝑖+𝐼𝐹𝑖−𝑂𝐹𝑖−𝐼𝐿𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 +
𝑆𝐹𝐴𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖  (20) 
-0.45
-0.4
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
00%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
A B C D E F G H I J L M N R S
Percentage of total employment in the sector
Impact of the pandemic (March - December 2020)
133
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 38 ---
where, in addition to the variables defined in Equation (19), TA refers to total assets. We can 
interpret 𝑆𝑖 +𝐼𝐹𝑖 −𝑂𝐹𝑖 −𝐼𝐿𝑖 as the profit of the period for the nonfinancial corporation i. 
Looking at the BACH database of the ECCBSO, we consider that the term 
𝑁𝑊𝑖+𝐸𝑄𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖  is equivalent 
to the inverse of the assets-to-equity ratio. We assume that the inverse of the assets-to-equity 
ratio follows a normal distribution, computing the variance from the interquartile range.  
𝑁𝑊+𝐸𝑄
𝑇𝐴  ≈ 𝑁(𝑄2, (
𝑄3−𝑄1
1.35 )
2
) (21) 
From here, we compute the number of nonfinancial corporations in each sector operating 
with negative equity before the start of the pandemic. These are the blue bars in Figure 1 7, 
with values fluctuating between 5% (mining and quarrying) and 15% (electricity, gas, steam, 
and air conditioning supply; and real estate activities). The blue bars in Figure 17 can be seen 
as the proportion of “zombie” corporations in each sector prior to the pandemic. 
If we apply the shock caused by the pandemi c (
𝑆𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖𝑥 (−𝐼𝑃𝑠̂), with the first term equal to 
0.1096 and the second term taken from our estimation in Section IV.B) and absent transfers 
from the government and sales of assets, the number of nonfinancial corporations operating 
with negative equity increases, as shown by the orange bars in Figure 17. Overall, the average 
increase is about 1.4% (affecting about 1% of the total employees in the euro area ), albeit 
with large heterogeneity across sectors. The larger increase is found in the accommodation 
and food service  activities sector, which has been subject to the largest shock from the 
COVID-19 pandemic and where nonfinancial corporations with negative equity increase 
from 10.56% to 16.60%. Several sectors ( transporting and storage ; administrative and 
support service activities; arts, entertainment, and recreation; and other services activities) 
see growth of the share of nonfinancial corporations with negative equity above 20% as well. 
At the other extreme, the water supply, sewerage, and waste management and remediation 
activities sector and information and communication services do not see any increase in the 
proportion of nonfinancial corporations with negative equity as a result of the pandemic, 
while others have minor increases. 
  
134
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 17: Share of Nonfinancial Corporations with Negative Equity 
 
Notes: The blue bars represent the share of nonfinancial corporations with negative equity as of 2018, 
according to Equation (21) and using data from the BACH database. The orange bars represent the change in 
that number derived from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The blue dots, in the right axis scale, represent 
the growth in the number of nonfinancial corporations with negative equity before and after the pandemic. A 
stands for agriculture, forestry, and fishing; B for mining and quarrying; C for manufacturing; D for electricity, 
gas, steam, and air conditioning supply; E for water supply, sewerage, and waste management and remediation 
activities; F for construction; G for wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycle s; H 
for transporting and storage; I for accommodation and food service activities; J for information and 
communication services; L for real estate activities; M for professional, scientific, and technical activities; N for 
administrative and support service activities; R for arts, entertainment, and recreation; and S for other services 
activities. 
Sources: BACH Working Group 2015; author’s analysis. 
So far, we have not considered any form of government support to nonfinancial corporations. 
As in Section IV.D, we make different assumptions about the size of government support in 
terms of total assets of nonfinancial corporations. Besides, we have seen that about 10% of 
nonfinancial corporations entered the COVID-19 pandemic with negative equity, signaling a 
worrying solvency position. We can make several assumptions about the share of these that 
would become insolvent as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
We can express the amount of NPLs to arise from the second -round effects of corporate 
insolvencies as follows: 
𝑁𝑃𝐿𝐻 = ∑ 𝜃𝑠 𝑥(𝛼 𝑥 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏 [
𝑁𝑊𝑖+𝐸𝑄𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 < 0]+𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏 [
𝑁𝑊𝑖+𝐸𝑄𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 < (
𝑆𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 𝑥 𝐼𝑃𝑠̂)−
𝑇𝑅𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖])𝑆
𝑠=1  (22) 
where 𝑁𝑃𝐿𝐻 is the impact of the pandemic on households, 𝜃𝑠 is the share of employment in 
sector s over total employment, 𝛼 the proportion of nonfinancial corporations with negative 
equity prior to the COVID -19 pandemic that become insolvent as a result of the pandemic, 
𝑁𝑊𝑖+𝐸𝑄𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖  a proxy for the leverage ratio (net worth and equity divided by total assets), 
𝑆𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 𝑥 𝐼𝑃𝑠̂ 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
A B C D E F G H I J L M N R S
Change in the share of
nonfinancial corporations with
negative equity due to COVID-
19 pandemic
Share of nonfinancial
corporations with negative equity
(2018)
Cross-sectoral average of
nonfinancial corporations with
negative equity (2018)
Growth rate of nonfinancial
corporations with negative equity
due to COVID-19 pandemic
135
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 40 ---
the impact of the pandemic on nonfinancial corporations,  and 
𝑇𝑅𝑖
𝑇𝐴𝑖 the transfers from the 
government as a share of total assets.  
NPLs may thus arise from the proportion of nonfinancial corporations with negative equity 
prior to the COVID-19 pandemic that file for corporate insolvency as a result of the pandemic 
and from nonfinancial corporations that were having positive equity at the onset of the 
pandemic but were severely affected by it, in a way that the government support via 
transfers cannot fully compensate. We assume that households employed in the nonfinancial 
corporations filing for insolvency default on their loan payments. We lack granular data to 
make a more fine-tuned assumption, and therefore, our results can be seen as a worst-case 
rather than a baseline scenario. 
Figure 1 8 shows the increase in the rate of NPLs to households as a result of corporate 
insolvencies under different assumptions regarding the extent of government support (x -
axis) and the degree to which the COVID-19 pandemic triggers the insolvency of nonfinancial 
corporations with negative equity prior to the pandemic ( chart legend ). In the extreme 
situation without government support and with all the nonfinancial corporations with 
negative equity going to insolvency, the rate of NPLs in the household sector can increase 
above 7%. This is, however, an unlikely outcome, given the extent of government support. If 
we consider that the transfers from the government to nonfinancial corporations account for 
2% of their total assets and that th e pandemic can trigger the insolvency of 25% of 
nonfinancial corporations with negative equity before the onset of the pandemic, the rate of 
additional NPLs reaches 2.1% (EUR 145 billion, as based on the amounts in Appendix A).  
  
136
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 41 ---
Figure 18: NPLs in the Household Sector Derived from Corporate Insolvencies 
 
Notes: The y-axis shows the share of NPLs of households that may arise as a result of corporate insolvencies, 
under different assumptions regarding the transfers from the government (x -axis) and the deg ree to which 
nonfinancial corporations with negative equity before the onset of the pandemic would become nonperforming 
as a result of the pandemic (see legend). 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
In the above calculations, we consider that transfers from the government are equally 
distributed across sectors of nonfinancial corporations. As a result, those sectors most 
affected by the pandemic are treated the same as other sectors less severely affected. 
Extending government support without considering the impact of the pandemic can have the 
unintended consequence of helping nonfinancial corporations in a vulnerable situation 
before the pandemic (with negative equity) and that should probably exit the market to 
continue their operations throughout the pandemic. 
This is more clearly seen if we assume that the pandemic does not trigger the insolvency of 
any nonfinancial corporations that entered it with negative equity (value of 0 for the legend 
in Figure 18). Figure 19 shows the increase, in percentage points, of the share of nonfinancial 
corporations with negative equity across different sectors and under different scenarios of 
government support. What emerges from these potential outcomes is a significant increase 
for sector I (accommodation and food service activities), which is not replicated by any other 
sector. Extending government support equally across sectors leads to reducing the number 
of nonfinancial corporations with negative equity in the other sectors and only slowly 
decreases the increase for sector I (accommodation and food service  activities). This does 
not seem the most optimal way of addressing difficulties in nonfinancial corporations. 
Targeted interventions by the government across sectors, depending on the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, seem to be justified. 
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1
137
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 19: Change in the Share of Nonfinancial Corporations with Negative Equity 
under Different Assumptions of Transfers from Governments 
 
Notes: Each bar shows the difference in the share of nonfinancial corporations with negative equity before the 
COVID-19 pandemic and after the  onset of the  COVID-19 pandemic, considering that transfers from 
government vary between 0 and 5% of the total balance sheet of nonfinancial corporations and that no 
nonfinancial corporation with n egative equity at the onset of the COVID -19 pandemic becomes insolvent. 
Positive (negative) values indicate that the share of nonfinancial corporations with negative equity is higher 
(lower) than at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. A stands for agriculture, forestry, and fishing; B for mining 
and quarrying; C for manufacturing; D for electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply; E for water supply, 
sewerage, and waste management and remediation activities; F for construction; G for wholesale and retail 
trade and repair of motor vehicles and motorcycle s; H for transporting and storage; I for accommodation and 
food service activities; J for information and communication  services; L for real estate activities; M for 
professional, scientific, and technical activities; N for administrative and support service activities; R for arts, 
entertainment, and recreation; and S for other services activities. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
If we assume the same targeted intervention as in Section IV.D, where by government 
support does not reach all sectors equally but is directed toward the most affected 
nonfinancial sectors, the increase in the share of NPLs to households resulting from 
corporate insolvencies is 0.65% (EUR 45 billion according to the data in Appendix A). Again, 
simply by using more efficiently the transfers from the governments, the amount of 
additional NPLs decreases by EUR 100 billion in the euro area. 
V. NPLs and the Loss-Absorbing Capacity of Banks 
Before measuring the loss -absorbing capacity  of banks on the basis of their accumulated 
equity and their leverage ratio, we make some considerations in the next section about bank 
resilience and the importance of maintaining a sound banking system through recessions. 
Afterwards, we propose some metr ics to analyze the capacity of the banking system to 
-4%
-2%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
A B C D E F G H I J L M N R S
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
138
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 43 ---
absorb losses derived from NPLs and apply these metrics to the estimate of NPLs computed 
in the previous section and to other previous crises. We use the estimates  in Figure 20 for 
NPLs, derived in Section IV.D and Section IV.F. 
Figure 20: Values Attributed to Main Variables in the Estimation of NPLs Arising from 
the COVID-19 Pandemic in Relation to Loans to Households 
Sector Government 
support 
Increase in 
rate of NPLs 
Additional NPLs 
in billion euros 
Increase in rate of 
NPLs over loans to 
nonfinancial 
corporations and 
households 
Nonfinancial 
corporations 
Not targeted 7.07% 797 4.38% 
Targeted 6.53% 736 4.05% 
Households 
Not targeted 2.1% 145 0.80% 
Targeted 0.65% 45 0.25% 
Total 
Not targeted — 942 5.18% 
Targeted — 781 4.30% 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
A. Discussion of Bank Resilience in Times of COVID-19 
In general terms, stress on nonfinancial corporations and households usually leads to an 
increase in NPLs. The academic literature has found that the evolution of the real economy 
plays a fundamental role in the evolution of NPLs (Beck, Jakubik, and Piloiu 2015; Ghosh 
2015). When considering the timing for the recognition of NPLs, it is important to note that 
the definition of NPLs entails nonpayment over 90 days. As such, the recognition of new NPLs 
tends to occur with some delay in comparison to the start of an economic recession.21 
Therefore, the impact of the stress in the real economy on the balance sheet of banks can 
then be expected to occur gradually.22 
 
21 The definition of NPLs also introduces the criterion of the borrower being unlikely to pay, in parallel to the 
90-days past -due criterion. As a result, earlier recognition of NPLs could be possible if the unlikely to pay 
criterion is used. Since 2015, the recognition of NPLs under the unlikely to pay criterion has varied between 
30% and 40% of total NPLs (EBA 2019). 
22 Over the long term, for banks using internal ratings models for the computation of capital requirements for 
credit risk, the increase in credit risk may be refl ected in the main parameters used in these models 
(probabilities of default, loss given default , and exposures at default), leading to an increase in risk weights 
associated with credit exposures, even if they are not recognized as nonperforming (or defaulted). 
139
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 44 ---
The increase in provisions resulting from the recognition of additional NPLs related to the 
COVID-19 pandemic is expected to reduce profits (or increase losses) and equity. When 
banks are simultaneously subject to that reduction and amidst a challenging and uncertain 
macroeconomic environment,23 the optimal individual response of banks may be to restrict 
new lending and deleverage to avoid the need to raise new capital or to reduce dividends. 
This response is, however, not optimal for the banking sector as a whole. Such behavioral 
response of ban ks is empirically documented in the academic literature ( Berger and Udell 
1994; Bernanke and Lown 1991; Gropp et al. 2018). Even if banks may have taken measures 
in the form of voluntarily reducing buffers, an overall reduction in new lending can be 
expected over the medium  term, in the absence of policy actions by regulatory and 
supervisory authorities. 
In a comparison with the GFC, the solvency position of banks at the end of 2019 was better 
than in 2007, with higher liquidity and capital ratios (the latter, both in absolute and in risk-
weighted terms). Besides, prudential authorities have tools available to address the effects 
of the COVID -19 pandemic on existing and on new lending. The current regulatory 
requirements establish that internal ratings models should use parameters through the cycle 
(TTC) rather than only as a point in time (PIT). Consequently, the impact of sudden 
recessions on prudential requirements can be attenuated. Other actions taken by prudential 
authorities refer to the release of previously built countercyclical capital buffers, guidance to 
make sure that regulatory provisions (especially cyclical capital buffers) do not impede the 
provision of credit to the real economy, and the retention of profits. In the accounting 
domain, the exp ected credit loss approach in International Financial Reporting Standard 
(IFRS) 9, put in place after the GFC, requires banks to anticipate provisioning of those credit 
exposures with a significant deterioration in credit risk (these exposures are moved into 
Stage 2, requiring the recognition of provisions for the whole lifetime of the exposure), 
without the need to wait for the recognition of the exposure as nonperforming (ESRB 2017; 
ESRB 2019).  
B. Estimating the Loss-Absorbing Capacity of Banks 
In view of the potential amount of NPLs to be generated by the COVID -19 pandemic, we 
analyze the capacity of banking systems subject to a non-risk-weighted capital requirement 
(that is, the leverage ratio) to absorb the losses caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
We consider that banks are subject to two binding prudential requirements (leverage ratio 
or risk-weighted capital ratios). We define these two requirements as: 
𝐿𝑅𝑡 = 
𝑂𝐹𝑡
𝑇𝐴𝑡
 (23) 
 
23 Banks have been operating with low levels of profitability, also derived from legacy assets from the  GFC and 
from the macroeconomic environment of low growth and low interest rates.  
 
140
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 45 ---
𝐶𝑅𝑡 =
𝑂𝐹𝑡
𝑅𝑊𝐴𝑡
=
𝑂𝐹𝑡
𝑅𝑊𝐷𝑡 𝑥 𝑇𝐴𝑡
 (24) 
where LRt denotes the leverage ratio, OFt own funds, TAt total assets, RWAt risk-weighted 
assets, and RWDt risk-weight densities (defined as risk -weighted assets divided by total 
assets). 
If we operate further and assume a prudential requirement of 3% for the leverage ratio 
(𝐿𝑅̅̅̅̅ = 0.03) and of 8% for the risk-weighted capital requirement (𝐶𝑅̅̅̅̅ = 0.08), we obtain: 
𝑂𝐹𝑡 = 𝐿𝑅𝑡 𝑥 𝑇𝐴𝑡 = 𝐶𝑅𝑡 𝑥 𝑅𝑊𝐷𝑡 𝑥 𝑇𝐴𝑡 
0.08 𝑥 𝑅𝑊𝐷𝑡 = 0.03 
𝑅𝑊𝐷𝑡 =
0.03
0.08 = 0.375 (25) 
Therefore, for banks with relatively low risk -weight densities (below 37.5%), the leverage 
ratio is the binding prudential requirement (see also Bank  of England 2014). Given the low 
risk-weight densities shown by banks in the last years (Basten and Sánchez Serrano 2019), 
we can assume that the risk -weighted capital requirement is  sometimes not binding on 
banks. 
Losses are absorbed by the existing capital of the banks, and the leverage ratio measures the 
loss-absorbing capacity of the banking system. That loss -absorbing capacity can be thought 
to be the amount of own funds of the bank in excess of the prudential requirement of the 
leverage ratio. We refer to this as excess of own funds. 
We express the excess of own funds in absolute terms as follows: 
𝐸𝑂𝐹𝑡 =
𝑂𝐹𝑡−(𝐿𝑅̅̅̅̅ 𝑥 𝑇𝐴𝑡 𝑥 (1−𝜃))
(1−𝐿𝑅̅̅̅̅)  (26) 
where EOFt refers to the excess of own funds, 𝐿𝑅̅̅̅̅ to the binding prudential requirement for 
the leverage ratio (that is, 3%), TA to total assets, and 𝜃 to the reduction in balance sheet size 
through deleverage. The expression (1−𝐿𝑅̅̅̅̅) is included to consider that a loss reduces the 
total balance sheet of the bank as well, so the own funds requir ed to meet the binding 
leverage ratio need to be slightly adjusted. 
Equation (26) can also be expressed as a share of total assets: 
𝑒𝑜𝑓𝑡 =
𝑂𝐹𝑡−(𝐿𝑅̅̅̅̅ 𝑥 𝑇𝐴𝑡 𝑥 (1−𝜃))
 𝑇𝐴𝑡 𝑥 (1−𝐿𝑅̅̅̅̅)  (27) 
where, in addition to the variables defined for Equation (26), eoft refers to the excess of own 
funds as a share of total assets. 
141
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 46 ---
Equation (26) and Equation (27) show a positive contribution of deleverage on the loss -
absorption capacity of banks. From the point of the view of an individual bank, deleverage is 
an avai lable valid strategy in a crisis, as it immediately increases the bank’s  capacity to 
absorb losses. 
In the next step, we compute how much NPLs should increase to fully exhaust the excess of 
own funds and breach the binding prudential requirement for the leverage ratio. The 
increase of NPLs that would bring the leverage ratio of banks to 3% is equal to: 
∆𝑛𝑝𝑙𝑡 = 
(𝐸𝑂𝐹𝑡 𝑥 (1+𝛾))+(𝛼 𝑥 𝑇𝐿𝑡 𝑥 (1−𝑛𝑝𝑙𝑡))
(𝑇𝐿𝑡 𝑥 (1−𝜃𝐿))−(𝐸𝑂𝐹𝑡 𝑥 (1+𝛾))  (28) 
where nplt is the rate of NPLs (calculated as the ratio of NPLs to total loans), EOF is the excess 
of own funds, 𝛾 is the recovery value from NPLs (or the amount of credit losses to be 
absorbed), 𝛼 is the provisioning of performing loans ( Stage 1 and Stage 2 loans under IFRS 
9), TL refers to total loans, and 𝜃𝐿 is the reduction in total loans. On the latter, the reduction 
in total loans does not necessarily imply a reduction in total assets, as ba nks may opt for 
intensifying other activities and business lines. As in the previous equation, the expression 
(𝐸𝑂𝐹𝑡 𝑥 (1+𝛾)) is deducted from total loans in the denominator as the absorption of these 
losses reduces the total amount of loans. 
According to Equation (28), the necessary increase of the rate of NPLs to exhaust the excess 
of own funds is a positive function of the existing provisioning for performing exposures, of 
the expected recovered amounts from NPLs, and of the existing excess of own funds . These 
are three important channels through which the resilience of the banking sector can be 
strengthened, particularly before the shock hits the economy. 
C. Increasing the Capacity to Withstand Losses from NPLs 
Equation (28) reveals three important factors  that shape the resilience of banks against an 
increase in NPLs and that have been the focus of intense policy work in the aftermath of the 
GFC:  
(1) Provisioning before the loan becomes nonperforming ( 𝛼). Under incurred loss 
approaches in accounting, a bank would not be allowed to recognise any loss from 
loans for which a default event has not occurred. With the introduction of expected 
credit loss approaches after the GFC, some credit losses can be recognized from 
their inception (ESRB 2017; ESRB 2019; Sánchez Serrano 2018). So, the capacity of 
the bank to anticipate downturns and to provision in advance can positively 
contribute to increasing its resilience once the shock materializes.  
(2) The amount recovered from NPLs (𝛾). There are several factors that can influence 
how much a bank can recover from a loan that becomes nonperforming. Starting 
with the most obvious, collateralized lending allows banks to recover higher 
amounts than unsecured lending. But factors like efficiency in courts and the 
existence of developed secondary markets for NPLs can also contribute to increase 
142
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 47 ---
the values recovered from them (Baudino and Yun 2017). 
(3) The reduction in total loans (𝜃𝐿). Indeed, an automatic way to gain resilience for a 
bank is to reduce the size of the loan portfol io so that existing equity covers a 
smaller loan portfolio. As mentioned before, this solution can be optimal for an 
individual bank, but when considered at the aggregate can generate a credit crunch 
and intensify the effects of the downturn. 
In the follow ing paragraphs, we illustrate the importance of the three variables above by 
means of a hypothetical example. Let’s assume a loan portfolio of 100 currency units (CU), 
where 2 CU are nonperforming at the onset of the COVID -19 pandemic and where the bank 
has an excess of own funds of 5 CU. We assume that banks can recover 30% of the amount of 
NPLs, and that accumulated provisions for performing loans represent 0.4% of them. 24 
Figure 21 shows in the y-axis the evolution of the change in the rate of NPLs that exhausts 
the excess of own funds of the bank for different values of the accumulated provisions for 
performing loans, of the recovered amounts from NPLs, and of the reduction in total loans, 
separately (shown in the x-axis). 
Starting with the left  panel on accumulated provisions for performing loans, our initial 
conditions (green diamond in the left -side chart of Figure 21) lead to a rate of NPLs to 
exhaust accumulated equity close to 7.4%. To increase th at rate of NPLs by 1 percentage 
point to 8.4% requires that provisions increase more than threefold (from 0.4% to 1.3%), as 
shown by the orange diamond. In the case of recovered amounts, recovering 30% of NPLs 
makes the bank resilient until a rate of NPLs reaches slightly above 7.3% (green diamond in 
the middle chart of Figure 21). As in the previous case, if we want the rate of NPLs that 
exhaust own funds to increase by 1 percentage point, the recovered amounts from NPLs 
should be around 0.5. In other word s, banks should recover approximately 50% from  the 
value of  NPLs (orange diamond in the middle chart of Figure 21). Finally, in the case of 
reductions in total loans, banks need to reduce their total loans by about 12% to increase the 
rate of NPLs that exhaust their own funds (orange diamond in the right chart of Figure 21). 
 
24 The latter being in line with the values reported in the EBA Ri sk Dashboard for pre-pandemic periods (EBA 
2020b). 
143
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 48 ---
Figure 21: Impact of Provisioning, Recovered Amounts from NPLs, and Deleveraging 
on the Rate of NPLs That Exhaust the Excess of Own Funds of Banks 
 
Notes: The chart on the left shows the rate of NPLs that exhaust the excess of own funds of banks with different 
intensities in provisioning (as a percentage of total loans). The chart in the middle shows the rate of NPLs that 
exhaust the excess of own funds of banks with different r ecovered amounts from NPLs (as a percentage of the 
gross carrying amount of the loan). The chart on the right  shows the rate of NPLs that exhaust the excess of 
own funds of banks with different values of the amount of total loans on the balance sheet of th e bank (as a 
percentage change over the outstanding amount in the previous period). Green diamonds represent the initial 
situation, mirroring the status of the European banking system at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the 
orange diamonds represent the value of each variable that increase s the rate of NPLs that exhaust own funds 
by 1 percentage point. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
Although the three parameters increase the rate of NPLs that exhaust the excess of own 
funds, their effect presents interesting differences. Indeed, changes in the recovered 
amounts from NPLs have the largest effect on the resilience of the bank. Besides, the curve 
for changes in total loans seems to be slightly convex. There is an additional point to consider 
here. As changes in accumulated provisions and in the recovered amounts from NPLs take 
time to materialize and are most likely not adopted in times of crisis, changes in total loans 
may be the only existing alternative for banks to increase their resilience during a crisis. But 
this strategy seems to be the least effective in overall terms. That dynamic points to the 
importance of “repairing the roof during sunny days.” 
D. Testing the Loss-Absorbing Capacity of Banks in Several Scenarios 
In this section, we compute the excess own funds and the increase in NPLs that would lead 
banks to breach the leverage ratio requirement under several hypothetical scenarios. We 
start from Equation (26) and Equation (28) and use the values shown in Figure 22. 
  
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
0.12
Changes in provisions for 
performing loans
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
0.12
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Changes in recovered  
amounts from NPLs
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
0.12
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
0.24
Changes in total loans
144
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 49 ---
Figure 22: Values for the Main Variables and Parameters to Assess the Loss-
Absorbing Capacity of Banks in the Euro Area 
Parameter Value Source and other information 
OFt 1,798 ECB Consolidated Banking Data, euro area, end 2019, bn EUR, 
total equity, domestic and stand-alone banks 
𝑳𝑹̅̅̅̅ 0.03 According to Basel III as implemented in the EU 
TAt 24,926 ECB Consolidated Banking Data, euro area, end 2019, bn EUR, 
domestic and stand-alone banks 
TLt 16,386 ECB Consolidated Banking Data, euro area, end 2019, bn EUR, 
domestic and stand-alone banks 
𝜸 0.35 Taken from Chart 10 of ESRB (2021b) 
𝜶 
0.0043 EBA Risk Dashboard, end 2019, computed as the share of 
loans in stages 1 and 2 multiplied by their coverage, divided 
by total loans 
nplt 0.027 EBA Risk Dashboard 
Sources: EBA 2020b; ECB 2021a; ESRB 2021b; author’s analysis. 
With this specification, the increase in the rate of NPLs to exhaust the excess of own funds 
should be slightly above 10% in case the bank does not decrease its amount of total assets 
and total loans (equivalent to 0 in the x -axis of Figure 21). As shown in Section V.B, 
deleverage, both in terms of total loans and total assets, slightly increases the loss-absorption 
capacity of banks.  
  
145
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 50 ---
Figure 23: Rate of NPLs That Exhaust the Excess of Own Funds of Banks under 
Different Assumptions Regarding Total Assets and Total Loans 
 
Notes: The x-axis shows the reduction in total loans in the balance sheet of banks and the y-axis NPL rates. The 
blue line shows the rate of NPLs that exhaust the excess of own funds over the 3% leverage ratio requirement 
of banks, considering that banks reduce their balance sheets and their lending at the same rate. The orange line 
shows the rate of NPLs that exhaust the excess of own funds over the 3% leverage ratio requirement of banks, 
considering that banks reduce their lending but maintain their total balance sheet size constant. All calculations 
made according to the values in Figure 22 and Equation (28). 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
The implicit ratio between total equity and total assets in our calculations is about 7.2%. 
However, as shown by Figure 24, there is large heterogeneity in the leverage ratio across the 
euro area. While some banking systems  exhibit values of the leverage r atio close to 10%, 
leverage ratios of banks in other countries take values around or below 6%. In the latter 
group, we find the largest national banking systems: Italy, Spain, France, Germany , and the 
Netherlands.  
8%
9%
10%
11%
12%
13%
14%
15%
16%
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
Same reduction in total assets and in total loans
Reduction in total loans but constant total assets
146
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 51 ---
Figure 24: Leverage Ratio in Euro Area Banking Systems 
 
Notes: Data refers to the fully phased -in leverage ratio as reported in the EBA Risk Dashboard  (EBA 2020b), 
with reference date December 2020. 
Source: EBA 2020b. 
In Figure 2 5, we show the rate of new NPLs that exhaust the excess of own funds, with a 
leverage ratio of 5.5%. In this case, the loss -absorption capacity of the banking system is 
significantly lower than in Figure 23, as an increase of 6% in the rate of NPLs is enough to 
exhaust the excess of own funds in banks. 
  
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
NL DE ES FR IT FI LT AT BE LU PT SK MT CY GR SI IE LV EE
147
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 52 ---
Figure 25: Rate of NPLs That Exhaust the Excess of Own Funds of Banks under 
Different Assumptions Regarding Total Assets and Total Loans, Assuming a Leverage 
Ratio of 5.5% 
 
Notes: The x-axis shows the reduction in total loans in the balance sheet of banks and the y-axis NPL rates. The 
blue line shows the rate of NPLs that exhausts the excess of own funds over the 3% leverage ratio requirement, 
considering that banks reduce their bal ance sheets and their lending at the same rate. The orange line shows 
the rate of NPLs that exhausts the excess of own funds over the 3% leverage ratio requirement, considering 
that banks reduce their lending but maintain their total balance sheet size con stant. All calculations made 
according to Equation (28) and the values in Figure 22, except for total assets and own funds, the latter being 
fixed as 5.5% of total assets. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
We look now at the possible increase in NPLs caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Together 
with our estimates from Section IV (5.18% and 4.30%), we use the increase in the adverse 
scenario of the 2018 EBA stress test ( EBA 2018), the estimate in Gourinchas et al. (2020), 
the average increase in NPLs in the GFC in the euro area countries, and the increase in NPLs 
in the 1997–1998 Asian financial crisis. The two latter are taken from the database of Laeven 
and Valencia (2020). 
The results of this comparison are shown in Figure 26. We appreciate first that an incr ease 
of NPLs as reported in Figure 20 could be absorbed by the euro area banking system, and the 
same applies when considering the results of the 2018 EBA stress test exercise (purple 
dotted line). However, the line for nontargeted government measures gets  rather close to 
the dark blue line associated with a leverage ratio of 5.5%. So, for those jurisdictions with 
lower values of the leverage ratio and nontargeted government support measures, the 
expected increase in NPLs can threaten the solvency of the ba nking system as a whole, 
particularly if banks do not deleverage. Similarly, in the case of the estimate in Gourinchas et 
al. (2020), which does not consider government support, absorbing the derived losses can 
be problematic for those jurisdictions with l ower leverage ratios. An increase in NPLs such 
as the one seen in the GFC in the euro area countries (green dotted line) can be absorbed 
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
Same reduction in total assets and in total loans
Reduction in total loans but constant total assets
148
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 53 ---
only by jurisdictions with higher leverage ratios and only with substantial deleveraging. 
Otherwise, the related losses exceed the accumulated own funds of banks. Finally, a scenario 
replicating the Asian crisis in terms of NPLs results in an insufficient capacity of the euro 
area banking system to absorb losses. This scenario seems nowadays far from the baseline 
expectations. 
Figure 26: Increases in the Rates of NPLs That Exhaust the Excess of Own Funds and 
Selected Rates of NPLs 
 
Notes: The x-axis shows the reduction in total loans in the balance sheet of banks and the y-axis NPL rates. The 
orange and dark blue line s represent the rate of NPLs that exhaust the excess of own funds over the binding 
leverage ratio requirement for the euro area, assuming the same reductions of total assets and total loans. The 
dotted lines show NPL rates from selected previous financial crises and from the latest EBA stress test, 
Gourinchas et al. (2020), and our estimations in Figure 20. Gourinchas et al. (2020) does not take into account 
government support measures. 
Sources: EBA 2018; Gourinchas et al. 2020; Laeven and Valencia 2020; author’s analysis. 
In general terms, the estimates of NPLs arising from the COVID -19 pandemic seem to be 
significantly lower than those observed in previous crises ( such as  the GFC or the Asian 
crisis), despite the large impact of the pandemic on the real economy. The extent of 
government support, the existing banking system’s net worth, and the limited duration of 
the pandemic may be factors explaining this difference with previous episodes of stress. 
Returning to the fourth question posed in the introduction (how many NPLs can banks 
absorb given their current non -risk-weighted capital levels), our findings point toward  a 
resilient banking system in the euro area in aggregated terms. Nonetheless, individual 
institutions (or group s of institutions) may be affected as a result of their initial solvency 
position and the concentration of their exposures. 
  
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
Reduction in total loans and total
assets - leverage ratio 5.5%
Reduction in total loans and total
assets - leverage ratio 7.2%
Increase NPLs - Asian crisis
Increase NPLs - Global Financial
Crisis
Increase NPLs - Gourinchas et al.
(2020)
Increase NPLs - EBA stress test
2018
Increase NPLs - nontargeted
government transfers
Increase NPLs - targeted
government transfers
149
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 54 ---
VI. Conclusions 
We have estimated the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic on nonfinancial corporations and 
households and whether that impact could lead to a material new wave of NPLs that could 
threaten the solvency of the banking system. We have used the sectoral balance sh eets and 
flows statements of a stylized economy (without the external sector) in our simulations to 
develop estimates of the impact of the pandemic, the potential increase in NPLs, and the 
capacity of the banking system to absorb the related losses. The co ncept of net worth has 
also been at the core of our analysis. 
Our methodology has several important caveats that must be mentioned here. Our stylized 
economy does not consider the external sector , and we do not assess second -round effects 
extensively. Seco nd-round effects could worsen the impact of the pandemic on the real 
economy through cross -sectoral interconnections and dependencies. Although we have 
made extensive use of the available short -term data for nonfinancial corporations and 
households, our calculations, made at an aggregated level, are based on many assumptions 
and should be regarded as approximations in terms of size, rather than as accurate point 
estimates. The assumption that the ratios of nonfinancial corporations follow a normal 
distribution must be mentioned here too. 
Our main findings, when applied to the euro area, can be summarized as follows. 
First, the COVID-19 pandemic is unevenly affecting nonfinancial corporations, depending on 
the goods and services they provide. Those providing essential goods or services that can be 
consumed remotely are less severely affected than nonfinancial corporations providing 
goods and services than cannot be consumed remotely and that are not essential. The impact 
on households depends on the percentage  of the population working in the most affected 
sectors. Given the different economic structures across the euro area, the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic is heterogeneous across countries. 
Second, there is a strong correlation between the decrease in sales of nonfinancial 
corporations and the duration of the pandemic, measured through the measures taken to 
limit economic activity. The longer the duration of the pandemic, the deeper its impac t on 
the economy, particularly on the most affected sectors. Our scenarios foresee a drop in 
corporate turnover of about 30% of the accumulated net worth of the sector  by the end of 
2021, before taking government support into account. 
Third, in scenarios where the pandemic continues, albeit with less intensity, the only way to 
prevent a large increase in NPLs is through very large transfers from the governments to 
nonfinancial corporations, which can be coupled with large sales of assets by corporations 
themselves. An estimated scenario for government support envisage s an increase in NPLs 
above EUR 700 billion. Designing transfers from the government that are targeted to the 
most affected nonfinancial corporations can have a large beneficial effect. Targeted  
government support can also mitigate the extent of NPLs from household loans as a result of 
corporate insolvencies. 
150
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 55 ---
Fourth, defining the loss-absorbing capacity of the banking system in terms of the excess of 
own funds over the binding leverage ratio requirement, euro area banks seem to be resilient 
enough, in aggregate, to absorb the losses caused by the COVID -19 pandemic on the real 
economy, without the need to decrease their lending activities. Our findings are aligned to 
those by Gourinchas et al. (202 0), Aiyar et al. (2021), and OECD (2021). The initial level of 
own funds is key to defining the loss-absorbing capacity of banks. Those banks and national 
banking systems that entered the COVID-19 crisis in a weaker position may find themselves 
close to br eaching the binding leverage ratio requirement in case the related credit losses 
materialize. Deleverage appears to be the most likely reaction in times of stress, albeit it is 
not much effective in increasing the resilience of banks. 
With the benefit of hindsight, we have not observed an increase in NPLs in the range of EUR 
700 billion , as discussed. Reviewing our calculations, we can attribute this to two main 
causes: (i) the extent of government support to nonfinancial corporations, probably going 
beyond our assumptions, and (ii) the capacity of the economy to adapt to the new conditions, 
mainly referring to the possibilities of teleworking. 25 These are also important lessons in 
increasing the understanding of the impact of pandemics on the economy.  
Finally, there is still some uncertainty about the evolution of the pandemic and how the 
economy will emerge from the pandemic, which business models are going to be impaired 
permanently, and which ones will succeed. Our paper contributes to the effort to understand 
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and on the financial system, but it says 
little about how the economy will look like in a few years’ time. 
  
 
25 The termination of government support measures in the most recent months may also trigger an increase 
in NPLs (ESRB 2021a).   
151
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 56 ---
VII. References 
Aiyar, Shekhar, Mai Chi Dao, Andreas A. Jobst, Aiko Mineshima, and Srobona Mitra. 2021. 
“COVID-19: How Will European Banks Fare?” International Monetary Fund Departmental 
Paper Series, No. 21/08. March 2021.   
https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/DP/2021/English/CHWEBFEA.ashx  
Bach Working Group . 2015. The Bank for the Accounts of Companies Harmonized [BACH] 
database. ECB Statistics Working Paper Series No. 11.  
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpsps/ecbsp11.en.pdf  
Baldwin, Richard, and Javier Lopez‐Gonzalez. 2015. “Supply‐Chain Trade: A Portrait of Global 
Patterns and Several Testable Hypotheses.” World Economy 38, no. 11: 1682–721.   
https://doi.org/10.1111/twec.12189 
Bank of England . 2014. “The Financial Policy Committee’s Review of the Leverage Ratio.” 
October 2014.   
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/paper/2014/the-fpc-review-of-the-
leverage-ratio-october-2014  
Barro, Robert, José Ursúa, and Joanna Weng. 2020. “The Coronavirus and the Great Influenza 
Pandemic: Lessons from the ‘Spanish Flu’ for the Coronavirus’s Potential Effects on Mortality 
and Economic Activity.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series , No. 
26866. April 2020.   
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w26866/w26866.pdf 
Barrot, J ean-Noël, B asile Grassi, and Julien Sauvagnat. 2020 . “Sectoral Effects of Social 
Distancing.” HEC Paris Research Paper No. FIN-2020-1371. Last revised July 7, 2020.  
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3569446 
Basten, M arisa, and  Antonio Sánchez Serrano . 2019. “European Banks after the Global 
Financial Crisis: A New Landscape.” Journal of Banking Regulation 20, no. 1, 51–73.  
 https://doi.org/10.1057/s41261-018-0066-3 
Battistini, Niccolò, and Grigor Stoevsky. 2020. “Alternative Scenarios for the Impact of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic on Economic Activity in the Euro Area.” European Central Bank . ECB 
Economic Bulletin 3/2020.   
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-
bulletin/focus/2020/html/ecb.ebbox202003_01~767f86ae95.en.html  
Baudino, Patrizia, and Hyuncheol Yun. 2017. “Resolution of Non-performing Loans: Policy 
Options.” Bank for International Settlements, Financial Stability Institute. FSI Insights on 
Policy Implementation No. 3. October 2017.    
https://www.bis.org/fsi/publ/insights3.pdf  
Beck, R oland, P etr Jakubik, and Annamaria Piloiu. 2015 . “Key Determinants of Non-
performing Loans: New Evidence from a Global Sample.” Open Economies Review 26, no. 3: 
152
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 57 ---
525–50.   
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11079-015-9358-8 
Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell. 1994. “Did Risk-Based Capital Allocate Bank Credit and 
Cause a ‘Credit Crunch’ in the United States?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 26, no. 3, 
part 2: 585–628.   
https://doi.org/10.2307/2077994 
Bernanke, B en S., and Mark Gertler. 1995. “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of 
Monetary Policy Transmission.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, no. 4: 27–48.   
http://doi.org/10.1257/jep.9.4.27 
Bernanke, Ben S., and Cara S. Lown. 1991. “The Credit Crunch.” Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity 1991, no. 2: 205–47.   
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/1991/06/1991b_bpea_bernanke_lown_friedman.pdf  
Boissay, Frederic, and Phurichai Rungcharoenkitkul. 2020. “Macroeconomic Effects of Covid-
19: An Early Review.” Bank for International Settlements. BIS Bulletin No. 7. April 17, 2020.  
https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull07.pdf  
Brainerd, Elizabeth., and Mark V. Siegler. 2003. “The Economic Effects of the 1918 Influenza 
Epidemic.” Center for Economic and Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 3791q. February 
23, 2003.  
https://cepr.org/publications/dp3791 
Carletti, E lena, T ommaso Oliviero, M arco Pagano, Loriana Pelizzon, and Marti G. 
Subrahmanyam. 2020. “The COVID-19 Shock and Equity Shortfall: Firm-Level Evidence from 
Italy.” The Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9, no. 3: 534–68.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/rcfs/cfaa014 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  (CDC). 2018. “1918 Pandemic Influenza: Three 
Waves.” Web page, accessed June 30, 2021.  
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/1918-commemoration/three-waves.htm  
Committee for the Coordination of Statistical Activities  (CCSA). 2020. “How COVID -19 Is 
Changing the World: A Statistical Perspective.” Volume 1. May 2020.  
https://data.unicef.org/resources/how-covid-19-is-changing-the-world-a-statistical-
perspective/ 
Del Rio -Chanona, R . María, P enny Mealy, Anton Pichler, François Lafond, and J. Doyne 
Farmer. 2020. “Supply and Demand Shocks in the COVID -19 Pandemic: An Industry and 
Occupation Perspective.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 36, no. S1: S94–S137.   
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/graa033 
De Santis, R oberto A., and Wouter Van der Veken . 2020. “Macroeconomic Risks across the 
Globe Due to the Spanish Flu .” E uropean Central Bank Working Paper Series , No. 2466 . 
153
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 58 ---
September 2020.  
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecb.wp2466~43b7489b61.en.pdf  
Ebeke, C hristian, N emanja Jovanovic, L aura Valderrama, and Jing Zhou. 2021 . “Corporate 
Liquidity and Solvency in Europe during COVID -19: The Role of Policies.” I nternational 
Monetary Fund. IMF Working Paper Series, No. 21/56.   
https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/WP/2021/English/wpiea2021056.ashx  
European Banking Authority (EBA). 2018. “2018 EU-Wide Stress Test: Results.” November 
2, 2018.   
https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/2419200/2018-EU-wide-stress-test-
Results.pdf/126521e6-613f-45e4-af84-cbd3b854afc5  
———. 2019. “EBA Report on NPLs: Progress Made and Challenges Ahead.” November 2019. 
https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Risk%20An
alysis%20and%20Data/Risk%20Assessment%20Reports/2019//Final%20EBA%20Repor
t%20on%20NPLs-for%20publication_final.pdf 
———. 2020a. “First Evidence on the Use of Moratoria and Public Guarantees in the EU 
Banking Sector.” November 2020.  
https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Risk%20An
alysis%20and%20Data/Risk%20Assessment%20Reports/2020/Thematic%20notes/The
matic%20note%20on%20moratoria%20and%20public%20guarantees/936761/For%20p
ublication%20-
%20Thematic%20note%20on%20moratoria%20and%20public%20guarantees.pdf 
———. 2020b. “Risk Dashboard: Data as of Q4 2020.” December 2020.  
https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Risk%20An
alysis%20and%20Data/Risk%20dashboard/Q4%202020/972092/EBA%20Dashboard%2
0-%20Q4%202020.pdf 
European Central Bank (ECB). 2020. “Eurosystem Staff Macroeconomic Projections for the 
Euro Area.” December 2020.  
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/projections/html/ecb.projections202012_eurosystemsta
ff~bf8254a10a.en.html 
———. 2021a. Consolidated Banking Data. Accessed June 3, 2021.   
https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/browse.do?node=9691533 
———. 2021b. Monetary Financial Institut ions Interest Rate Statistics. Accessed June 30, 
2021.   
https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/browseExplanation.do?node=1513 
———. 2021c. Quarterly Sectoral Accounts. Accessed June 30, 2021.   
https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/browse.do?node=9691132 
154
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 59 ---
European Commission . 2019. Annual Report on European SMEs 2018/2019 . November 
2019. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2826/603707 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). 2017. “Financial Stability Implications of IFRS 9.” July 
2017.  
https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/reports/20170717_fin_stab_imp_IFRS_9.en.pdf  
———. 2019. “The Cyclical Behaviour of the ECL Model in IFRS 9.” March 2019.  
https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/reports/esrb.report190318_reportonthecyclicalbeh
aviouroftheECLmodel~2347c3b8da.en.pdf  
———. 2021a. “Financial Stability Implications of Support Measures to Protect the Real 
Economy from the COVID-19 Pandemic.” February 2021.  
https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/reports/esrb.reports210216_FSI_covid19~cf3d32a
e66.en.pdf  
———. 2021b. “Prevention and Management of a Large Number of Corporate Insolvencies.” 
April 2021.  
https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/reports/esrb.report210428_PreventionAndManage
mentOfALargeNumberOfCorporateInsolvencies~cf33e0285f.en.pdf  
Eurostat. 2022a. Annual sector accounts. Accessed June 30, 2021.  
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/nasa_10_ki/default/table?lang=en 
———. 2022b. Hours of work and absences from work - quarterly statistics , Statistics 
Explained. Accessed June 30, 2021.  
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php?title=Hours_of_work_and_absences_from_work_-_quarterly_statistics 
———. 2022c. Short-term business statistics. Accessed June 30, 2021.  
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/sts_intv_m/default/table?lang=en 
———. 2022d. Data on households. Accessed June 30, 2021.  
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/cens_hndwsize/default/table?lang=en 
Garrett, Thomas A. 2007. “Economic Effects of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic: Implications 
for a Modern-Day Pandemic.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. November 2007.  
https://www.stlouisfed.org/-/media/project/frbstl/stlouisfed/files/pdfs/community-
development/research-reports/pandemic_flu_report.pdf 
Ghosh, A mit. 2015 . “Banking-Industry Specific and Regional Economic Determinants of 
Nonperforming Loans: Evidence from US States.” Journal of Financial Stability 20 (October): 
93–104.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2015.08.004 
Gourinchas, Pierre-Oliver, Sebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Veronika Penciakova, Nick Sander. 2020. 
“Estimating SME Failures in Real Time: An Application to the COVID -19 Crisis .” N ational 
155
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 60 ---
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 27877. September 2020.  
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w27877/w27877.pdf 
Gropp, R eint, T homas Mosk, S teven Ongena, Carlo Wix. 2018. “Banks Response to Higher 
Capital Requirements: Evidence from a Quasi-natural Experiment.” Review of Financial 
Studies 32, no. 1: 266–99.   
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy052 
Hale, Thomas, Sam  Webster, Anna Petherick, Toby Phillips, and Beatriz Kira. 2020. Oxford 
COVID-19 Government Response Tracker, Blavatnik School of Government.  
https://covidtracker.bsg.ox.ac.uk/ 
Household Finance and Consumption Network . 2020. “The Household Finance and 
Consumption Survey: Results from the 2017 Wave.” European Central Bank Statistics Paper 
Series, No. 36. March 2020.  
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpsps/ecb.sps36~0245ed80c7.en.pdf 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021. “World Economic Outlook Update.” January 2021.  
https://www.imf.org/-
/media/Files/Publications/WEO/2021/Update/January/English/text.ashx 
Italian Government. 2020. Decreto-legge 20 marzo 2020 (in Italian).  
https://www.governo.it/sites/new.governo.it/files/dpcm_20200322.pdf  
Jordà, Òscar, S anjay R. Singh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2020. “L onger-Run Economic 
Consequences of Pandemics.” Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 
14543. June 2020.  
https://econpapers.repec.org/scripts/redir.pf?u=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cepr.org%2Facti
ve%2Fpublications%2Fdiscussion_papers%2Fdp.php%3Fdpno%3D14543;h=repec:cpr:ce
prdp:14543 
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2020. “The Great Lockdown and the 
Big Stimulus: Tracing the Pandemic Possibility Frontier for the U.S.” National Bureau of 
Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 27794. September 2020.  
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w27794/w27794.pdf 
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy 105, 
no. 2: 211–48.   
https://doi.org/10.1086/262072 
Kohlscheen, Emanuel, Benoît Mojon, and Daniel Rees. 2020. “The Macroeconomic Spillover 
Effects of the Pandemic on the Global Economy.” Bank for International Settlements, BIS 
Bulletin No. 4. April 6, 2020.   
https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull04.pdf 
156
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 61 ---
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2020. “Systemic Banking Crises Database II.” IMF Economic 
Review 68, no. 2: 307–61.   
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41308-020-00107-3 
McKibbin, W arwick, and Roshen Fernando. 2020. “The Global Macroeconomic Impacts of 
COVID-19: Seven Scenarios.” Brookings Institution working paper.  
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/20200302_covid19.pdf 
McKibbin, Warwick, and Alexandra Sidorenko. 2006. “Global Macroeconomic Consequences 
of Pandemic Influenza.” Australian National University , Crawford School of Public Policy , 
Centre for Applied Macroeconomic Analysis Working Papers. February 2006.  
https://cama.crawford.anu.edu.au/pdf/working-papers/2006/262006.pdf 
Mojon, Benoît, Daniel Rees, and Christian Schmieder. 2021. “How Much Stress Could Covid 
Put on Corporate Credit? Evidence Using Sectoral Data.” Bank for International Settlements, 
BIS Quarterly Review, March 2021.   
https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt2103e.pdf 
Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development  (OECD). 2021. “The COVID-19 
Crisis and Banking System Resilience: Simulation of Losses on Nonperforming Loans and 
Policy Implications.” March 2021.   
https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial-markets/COVID-19-crisis-and-banking-system-
resilience.pdf 
Pagano, Marco, Sam Langfield, Viral Acharya, Arnoud Boot, Markus Brunnermeier, Claudia 
Buch, Martin Hellwig, André Sapir, and Ieke van den Burg. 2014. “Is Europe Overbanked?” 
European Systemic Risk Board, Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee, No. 4. June 
2014.   
https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/asc/Reports_ASC_4_1406.pdf  
Sánchez Serrano, A ntonio. 2018. “Financial Stability Consequences of the Expected Credit 
Loss Model in IFRS 9.” Revista de Estabilidad Financiera 34 (May): 81–99.  
https://www.bde.es/f/webbde/GAP/Secciones/Publicaciones/InformesBoletinesRevistas
/RevistaEstabilidadFinanciera/18/MAYO/Articulo_Sanchez-en.pdf 
United Nations  (UN). 2009. “System of National Accounts 2008 .” September 30, 2009.  
https://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/docs/SNA2008.pdf 
US Congressional Budget Office (US CBO). 2005. “A Potential Influenza Pandemic: Possible 
Macroeconomic Effects and Policy Issues.” Report. December 8, 2005; updated July 27, 2006. 
https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/109th-congress-2005-2006/reports/12-08-
birdflu.pdf  
  
157
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 62 ---
VIII. Appendixes 
 
Appendix A : Balance Sheet of Our Stylized Economy, with 
Amounts for the Euro Area at the End of 2019 
Figure 27: Stylized Balance Sheet of the Euro Area Economy, at the End of 2019 
 
Notes: Values in billion euro for the main categories of the balance sheet and flow statement of households, 
nonfinancial corporations, financial intermediaries , and the government, taken from the sectoral annual 
accounts; “na” refers to those captions not available in current disclosures.  
Sources: ECB 2021c; author’s calculations. 
 
  
Households
Real Estate 32,921 Loans 6,896 Wages 5,751 Interest of loans 237
Financial assets 22,454 Future tax liabilities na Interest 392 Consumption 6,393
Pension rights 3,468 Other liabilities 900 Dividends 1,188 Taxes 3,361
Insurance assets na Net worth 52,814 Transfers 2,227 Savings (change in net worth) 2,708
Other assets 1,767 Other inflows/outflows 3,141
Nonfinancial corporations
Inventories na Loans 11,284 Capital inflows 1,572 Wages 3,822
Customer receivables 3,426 Bonds 1,524 Sales 4,792 Interest of loans 203
Financial assets 25,501 Payables to suppliers 3,265 Transfers 738 Interest of bonds 82
Fixed assets 14,776 Pension rights 404 Amortisation 1,227
Future tax liabilities na Dividends 1,082
Other liabilities 1,415 Other inflows / outflows 385
Net worth 3,209 Profit (change in net worth) 301
Shares and other equity 22,602
Financial intermediaries
Loans 20,549 Deposits 28,188 Interest from loans 695 Wages 247
Shares 25,245 Technical reserves 9,300 Dividends 88 Interest bonds 462
Bonds 18,585 Pension rights na Insurance premia 422 Dividends 358
Real Estate 18,720 Bonds 8,119 Capital gains 7 Loan losses 50
Other liabilities 8,513 Asset management fees na Insurance claims na
Net worth 911 Other inflows / outflows 0
Shares and other equity 28,068 Profit (change in net worth) 95
Government
Future taxes and fees na Pension rights na Taxes 5,477 Interest of bonds 191
Fixed assets 7,525 Bonds 9,371 Fees na Consumption 631
Shares 2,310 Other financial liabilities 2,167 Capital revenue 60 Investment 333
Other financial assets 1,703 Deficit (surplus) 71 Transfers 2,965
Wages 1,179
Other expenses 310
Assets Liabilities OutflowsInflows
Assets Liabilities Inflows Outflows
Assets Liabilities Inflows Outflows
Assets Liabilities Inflows Outflows
158
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 63 ---
Appendix B : The Impact of the COVID -19 Pandemic on 
Governments and on the External Sector 
Confronted with the COVID -19 crisis, the government sector is expected to simultaneously 
see a decrease in taxes and fees derived from the reduction in economic activity and an 
increase in (1) transfers to households (mainly, unemployment benefits) and to nonfinancial 
corporations, and (2) consumption (health care expenses). As a result, deficits are expected 
to substantially increase. In theory, if such deficits are temporary, recovery is solid, and there 
is a clear path of reduction of the stock of sovereign debt, there should not be large concerns 
about the long-term sustainability of sovereign debt.  
Considering the external sector, the COVID -19 pandemic affects over the long  term the two 
main components of the balance of payments (current and capital accounts) and the financial 
account. Given the tight commercial relations among different countries in the world, where 
supply chains have become global for many goods, exports and imports can change 
depending on the nature of the underlying goods and on how they are impacted by the 
pandemic. Regarding the provision of cross-border services, the lockdown restrictions have 
affected those that cannot be provided remotely (such as tourism), also impairing the 
current account of those countries where these services have an important weight in the 
economy. Concerning the capital account, an expected retrenchment of cross-border capital 
flows can also negatively affect investment. Besides, cross -border banking and financial 
flows, also included in the financial account, can vary largely as a result of the COVID -19 
pandemic, either as a result of a stronger focus on domestic activities (“home  bias”) or as a 
“flight to safety” toward countries less affected by the decrease in economic activity, among 
other considerations. 
  
159
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 64 ---
Appendix C : Further Details on the Impact of the Pandemic 
across Sectors of Nonfinancial Corporations 
Figure 28 shows the degree to which each sector is estimated to provide essential goods and 
services and the extent to which they can be consumed remotely, according to Section III.B. 
Figure 28: Essential and Remote Characteristics of Goods and Services Provided by 
Sector 
Sector (A) 
Essential 
(B) 
Remote 
(A) x(B) 
Impact 
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 0.87 0.3 3.82 
Mining and quarrying 0.33 0.1 30.00 
Manufacturing 0.41 0.4 6.12 
Electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply 1.00 1.0 1.00 
Water supply , sewerage, and waste management and 
remediation activities 1.00 1.0 1.00 
Construction 0.45 0.1 22.00 
Wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor vehicles 
and motorcycles 0.26 0.7 5.42 
Transporting and storage 1.00 0.3 3.33 
Accommodation and food service activities 0.13 0.2 40.00 
Information and communication services 1.00 0.9 1.11 
Real estate activities 0.01 0.6 166.67 
Professional, scientific, and technical activities 1.00 1.0 1.00 
Administrative and support service activities 0.01 1.0 100.00 
Arts, entertainment, and recreation 0.01 0.2 500.00 
Other services activities 0.01 0.5 200.00 
Pro memoria: Financial and insurance services 1.00 1.0 1.00 
 
Notes: The table shows the degree to which the goods and services provided by each sector are essential and 
can be consumed remotely, as explained in section III.B. The value of 0.01 is attributed instead of zero, in order 
not to arrive at an undetermined expression. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
The breakdown of gross value added of nonfinancial corporations, which we use to obtain 
the aggregate for nonfinancial corporations, by sector does not fully match the NACE 
industry classification codes. As shown in Figure 29 , we had to make some adjustments, 
160
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 65 ---
taking averages when necessary. First, the difference between industry (except 
construction) and manufacturing, as reported by Eurostat, is mapped to ( 1) mining and 
quarrying, ( 2) electricity, gas, steam , and air conditioning supply ; and ( 3) w ater supply , 
sewerage, and  waste management and remediation activities. Second, the Eurostat 
wholesale and retail trade, transport, accommodation and food service activities  sector is 
divided equally between ( 1) wholesale and retail trade and repair of mot or vehicles and 
motorcycles, ( 2) transporting and storage, and ( 3) accommodation and food service 
activities. Similarly, the NACE sectors professional, scientific , and technical activities; and 
administrative and support service activities are merged by Eu rostat into one sector. The 
same occurs with arts, entertainment , and recreation; and other services activities, as they 
appear as one in the database of Eurostat. 
Figure 29: Equivalence between NACE Codes and Sector Reported in Gross Value 
Added by Eurostat 
Sector NACE code Sector Eurostat 
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 
Mining and quarrying 
Industry (except construction), with 
manufacturing separately reported 
Manufacturing 
Electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply 
Water supply, sewerage, and waste management and 
remediation activities 
Construction Construction 
Wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor 
vehicles and motorcycles Wholesale and retail trade, transport, 
accommodation, and food service 
activities Transporting and storage 
Accommodation and food service activities 
Information and communication services Information and communication services 
Financial and insurance services Financial and insurance services 
Real estate activities Real estate activities 
Professional, scientific, and technical activities Professional, scientific, and technical 
activities; administrative and support 
service activities Administrative and support service activities 
Arts, entertainment, and recreation Arts, entertainment, and recreation; other 
service activities; activities of household 
and extraterritorial organizations and 
bodies 
Other services activities 
Source: Eurostat; author’s analysis. 
Short-term business statistics by Eurostat do not cover all the sectors we co nsider in our 
analysis of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on nonfinancial corporations.  
161
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano

--- Page 66 ---
Figure 30 shows the necessary adjustments to reach full coverage of all NACE sectors. 
Figure 30: Adjustments Made to the Sectoral Impact of the Pandemic in Line with 
Short-Term Statistics and Data on Gross Value Added 
Sector (largest NACE code) Adjustment to short-term statistics 
Agriculture, forestry, and fishing Based on the impact of the pandemic, we use 
“transporting and storage” 
Mining and quarrying  
Manufacturing  
Electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning 
supply  
Water supply, sewerage, and waste 
management and remediation activities  
Construction  
Wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor 
vehicles and motorcycles  
Transporting and storage  
Accommodation and food service activities  
Information and communication services  
Financial and insurance services 
No data; we use “professional, scientific, and 
technical activities,” based on impact of the 
pandemic 
Real estate activities No data; we use data from “construction” 
Professional, scientific, and technical activities  
Administrative and support service activities  
Arts, entertainment, and recreation 
No data; we use data from “administrative and 
support service activities,” based on impact of 
the pandemic 
Other services activities 
No data; we use data from “administrative and 
support service activities,” based on impact of 
the pandemic 
Notes: Impact of the pandemic refers to the calculations made in Section III.B. See also Table 6. 
Source: Eurostat; author’s analysis. 
The left panel of Figure 31 compares the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic computed 
according to Section III.A and the impact derived from the short-term statistics by Eurostat. 
We can observe a strong negative relation between the two approaches (higher impact 
translates into lower turnover). Sector I (accommodation and food service activities) can be 
162
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 67 ---
seen as an outlier, since the decrease in net turnover has been much larger than the impact 
of the pandemic, based on the nature of the goods and services provided as essential and 
remote. Excluding this sector from the computation increases the R2 coefficient to 0.6 (right 
panel of Figure 31). 
Figure 31: Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic Computed as in Section III.A and as 
Derived from Short-Term Statistics on Turnover of Nonfinancial Corporations 
 
Notes: The x -axis shows the impact, in natural logarithms ( ln), of the COVID -19 pandemic on nonfinancial 
corporations, according to Equation (1). The y-axis shows the decrease in turnover per sector derived from the 
short-term business statistics by Eurostat between March 2020 and December 2020, as derived in Section IV.B. 
The right panel exclude s the sector accommodation and food service activities, which appears as an outlier in 
the left panel (very low value for the y-axis). 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
 
 
R² = 0.341
-0.45
-0.4
-0.35
-0.3
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
R² = 0.5999-0.2
-0.18
-0.16
-0.14
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
163
From Lost Turnover to Nonperforming Loans Sánchez Serrano