--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Brian Sack Lessons Learned: Brian Sack 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2022) "Lessons Learned: Brian Sack," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 216-218. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1431 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/13 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/13

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability  
Lessons Learned 
 
Brian Sack 
By Sandra Ward 
Charged with overseeing the implementation of the asset -purchase programs and liquidity 
facilities in his roles as executive vice president of the Markets Group and manager of the System 
Open Market Account at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York  (FRBNY), Brian Sack played a 
critical role in keeping markets functioning during the years 2009 –2012. He served as an 
adviser to top policymakers , and, in addition to implementing the vario us programs designed 
to stabilize financial conditions, he monitored their impact and measured their performance. 
This Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview with Sack on November 13, 2020; the 
full transcript may be accessed here. 
Crisis may require new tools that must be tweaked and honed.   
By the time Sack joined the FRBNY in March 2009, the decision to employ large-scale asset-
purchase programs (which would come to be known as quantitative easing) had been made 
and the size of the programs expanded. This was a new tool to help the Federal Reserve affect 
certain outcomes in the economy that were beyond the scope of the fed funds rate it typically 
relied on. The implementation of the programs was hurried to relieve the stress in the 
financial system and improve market functioning. Said Sack: “The mindset was that the Fed 
had to do everyt hing it could to support the recovery, and these programs, as well as the 
liquidity facilities and other programs, had been introduced very quickly. ” The programs 
were closely monitored, he said:  
They were a new instrument that was going to be used in addition to the federal funds 
rate. From a policy perspective , it was a fascinating period to think about how that 
instrument worked and about how it should be used and how to adjust that usage to 
whatever situation was occurring at the time. That involves a lot of analysis and a lot 
of work by the Federal Reserve staff in the form of memos to the FOMC [Federal Open 
Market Committee], but also in conversations among a smaller set of policy makers 
who ultimately had to make recommendations to the FOMC. 
In addition to the asset-purchase programs, the Federal Reserve added “forward guidance” 
to its arsenal of weapons to influence financial conditions and support economic growth. 
Sack observed,  
To this day, the FOMC notes that its tools are “forward guidance” and “asset-purchase 
programs.” In this period, those two tools emerged and were used in ways that hadn’t 
been used before. Their usage evolved over time during this period, but these were 
the two primary tools available. 
There were some concerns about the cost of the programs and their form, given how quickly 
they were implemented. Yet, as the associated costs proved muted, the programs were more 
expanded and became more effective. Sack noted: 
216

--- Page 4 ---
In terms of their design, perhaps it is surprising that the set of programs ranged from 
such a large discrete program for QE1 ―a $1.75 trillion program announced 
upfront―to QE3―a monthly flow of purchases. The maturity extension program and 
QE2 were of intermediate sizes. The asset -purchase programs therefore took a 
number of different forms. In hindsight, we should try to learn about what’s the best 
of those forms and what’s the right way to implement them going forward. The 
practice has landed much more in the direction of QE3 in terms of specifying an open-
ended flow of purchases. That was something that evolved over time across the 
program. 
Bigger bank reserves are a risk-free liquid asset that can be used to fight the crisis. 
A debate during the Global Financial Crisis that continues today is the expanding size of th e 
central bank’s balance sheet  and whether it hamstrings the Fed’s abilities to raise interest 
rates. Sack argued, 
By having a bigger balance sheet, the Fed ends up creating a bigger set of reserves in 
the banking system. Our view was , the banking system and the financial markets 
needed a large amount of reserves. Reserves are a very effective asset for the central 
bank to provide , since they are a risk -free liquid ass et that the banking system can 
use for its liquidity management purposes. It’s essentially  costless for the central 
bank to provide it. 
For those reasons, I thought the balance sheet shouldn’t shrink too far. The way the 
market has evolved has essentially proved this right. In 2019, we saw some pressures 
begin to emerge in funding markets as reserve balances fell, and that happened 
earlier than people thought. 
However, maintaining an expanded balance sheet is not without risks. Sack discussed this 
point: 
Some might argue that with the Fed holding a larger amount of government debt, and 
with government debt increasing, maybe there  will come a time when the Fed feels 
compromised by the fiscal authority, where it can’t raise interest rates because that 
would be too costly to the government, given the high levels of debt.  
The root probl em in that argument comes with the level of government debt more 
than the size of the Fed’s balance sheet. And it involves the Fed becoming 
compromised in terms of its objectives.  
The balance sheet is extremely big now, so it is a valid question to ask wh at happens 
from here. I would imagine that we’re going to see something similar to what we saw 
after the financial crisis, and the Fed is not going to keep the balance sheet at this size  
 
217
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
indefinitely. We’ll go through a period where it shrinks the balance sheet  back 
towards a more normal level. 
Dated: September 2022 
Lessons Learned No. 2019-54 
Copyright © Yale University. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
218
Lessons Learned: Brian Sack Ward