--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Stephen King Lessons Learned: Stephen King 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Steven H. Kasoff 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. and Kasoff, Steven H. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Stephen King," Journal of Financial 
Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 425-428. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1272 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/16 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/16

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Stephen King 
By Matthew A. Lieber and Steven H. Kasoff 
Stephen King started his career in finance at Bankers Trust in 1997 as a computer scientist with 
a business degree. He worked on structured credit transactions when credit derivatives were 
just being invented. In 2005, King joined Barclays’ structured credit group, where he managed 
a CDO (collateralized debt obligation) correlation desk that was different from standard dealer 
CDO units. In 2009, he launched C12 Capital Management to relieve Barcl ays of distressed 
subprime positions. Presently, King finances and builds luxury hotels as founder and CEO of 
Sardis Developments. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview with King. 
The dawn of structured finance was a promising time for fina ncial wizards like King 
and the institutions that employed them. 
King brought computer engineering training, high -end quantitative skills, and a creative 
mindset to Bankers Trust (BT). The 1998 Long-Term Capital Management crisis interrupted 
his initial assignment to emerging markets. BT reassigned King to its structured credit unit. 
“It was right at the dawn of structured asset-backed derivatives.” 
Deutsche Bank acquired BT in 1999 and moved King to its derivatives group in New York. 
One deal King recalled  was Rhombus, “which involved selling protection on a portfolio of 
asset-backed securities owned by Bayerische Landesbank, buying protection from insurance 
companies and other counterparties around the world.” Another named Descartes involved 
a similar app roach. “We would go and buy a portfolio of securities, fund them in their 
conduit, buy protection, and find a way to take out the carry as an arbitrage.” 
For Deutsche and then for Barclays from 2005 through 2008, King’s groups engineered 
complex credit dea ls that offered profitability across a range of different scenarios. These 
transactions commonly had many sides. In one deal, they might exchange risk for cash flows, 
buy swaps to mitigate risk, and use leverage to exploit the difference. 
We [had] various ways of generating profit for the bank, whether in structured client 
transactions, proprietary trading, trading book profits, anything and everything that 
[was] associated with asset-backed securities [ABS]. 
King’s ABS correlation desk at Barclays went by many names —and brought many 
ways to profit. 
There were many names for King’s group, and it had many ways to make money. “It was 
called a principal mortgage trading desk in one caucus of people. It was a structured 
synthetic ABS desk in another, it was a synthetic CDO in another, it was [an ABS] correlation 
desk in another.” What made it unique beyond the complexity of its transactions was the way 
the group combined unorthodox, creative deal -making and disciplined attention to risk. 
Whereas a more convention al CDO structuring group would accumulate risk, structure it, 
425

--- Page 4 ---
then sell it, King’s desk “would accumulate risk in one or a number of markets, then create 
instruments that referenced those risks and place those into another market.” From there, 
opportunities followed to “take a mixture of profits from basis, carry, or directional 
positions,” depending on different market scenarios and volatilities. 
The name “ABS correlation desk” referred to a strategy distinct from standard dealer CDO 
structuring groups. Si milar to corporate correlation desks, King’s group at Barclays was 
accumulating risk, then creating derivatives linked to that risk in the form of protection from 
other investors. Customizing these new derivatives to fit investor appetites and acquiring 
ratings on them permitted King and Barclays to charge a premium price. However, these 
trades provided only a partial and imperfect hedge, which then had to be risk -managed and 
further hedged. This approach is often referred to as delta hedging.1 
Correlation had at least two aspects, spurring King’s group to assess risk based on (1) 
industry standards and (2) “market -implied numbers” derived from a multiplicity of 
factors. 
Delta hedging forced King’s group to think seriously about correlation, which took on at least 
two meanings in the case of the Barclays group: the correlation of risk (of loss or default) 
among mortgages within a mortgage -backed security and the correlation of risk between 
different CDO tranches or mortgage -backed securities. In a typical tr ansaction, an investor 
approached them seeking to acquire $100 million of exposure to a AAA -rated tranche that 
referenced a portfolio of subprime mortgage -backed securities. King’s group identified the 
particular subprime bonds (but did not need to actually acquire them), get the AAA rating on 
the tranche, and make an offer to the investor. Offer accepted, they had a synthetic short risk 
position in the mortgage bonds; “we needed to hedge” by buying the ABX Index or other 
derivatives linked to a similar por tfolio of mortgage bonds. They had to make sense of two 
different probability distributions, King said: the rating agency modeling based on historical 
asset value and defaults versus market-implied numbers. 
You carried two separate views of the world: (1) a real -world view affecting how 
we’re putting portfolios together for investors and rating agencies; and (2) what 
models are we using to extract that same info from the market? 
Deriving market-implied distributions for CDO tranches was challenging given the illiquidity 
and complexity of the security. In the corporate market, King explained, “specific names were 
quoted at specific maturities on homogeneous contracts. The ABS world wasn’t like that.” 
Valuations of single names were not informative. King’s gro up had to assess the likelihood 
and correlation of losses within and between the tranches. 
 
1 James Chen, “Delta Hedging,” Investopedia, updated January 28, 2021, 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/deltahedging.asp. 
426
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
King’s strategy meant that running the desk was a high -maintenance affair with 
multiple keys required for success: hedging to limit risk , constantly updating the 
assumptions, stress-testing pre-crisis. 
King recognized a proliferation of models, each with its own assumption and flaws, and 
favored an internally developed tool called Matrix Price. “It took in every bit of information 
we could gather every day on every bo nd.” King worked at length with statistician David Li 
but said that their math exercises were ultimately not elucidating. Rather, determining the 
correlation values required making assumptions and constantly updating them whenever 
prices moved. 
Delta hedging forced King’s group to approximate a marked-to-market position when 
market prices were not available. 
In early 2007, after receiving kudos for his profits in 2006, King stress -tested his portfolio 
using high correlation values of 60% to 70%. The results  were alarming enough for him to 
act early in 2007 to increase his hedging across the portfolio. 
If I’d have sat and just taken price testing, or just said, “Don’t worry, it’s in a non-mark-
to-market book” —just wait for the steam roller to ride over me. Th at’s why we’re 
here today. We wired ourselves up to those Matrix Prices and had marked-to-market 
“super senior.” We had to react because we were marked to market. And if we weren’t 
marked to market, it was tough. 
With sufficient vision, technical expertise, and discipline, you could profit and survive 
in subprime CDOs—though such a combination was uncommon. 
Noteworthy in this case, delta hedging was effective in its market acuity and its execution. 
King’s group deployed a combination of computer skills and engineering, independent -
mindedness, and discipline. They questioned market wisdom without dismissing it, aware of 
the Barclays mandate that allowed somewhat freewheeling methods within clear limits. 
The institutional investors who bought subprime CDOs wer e not stupid; rather, they 
reacted to market pressures and went after what they saw was working. 
As the housing market turned bad and mortgage lenders failed in 2006–07, spreads on CDO 
tranches were slow to respond. “They did not widen as they should have, ” King explained, 
“because of tremendous amounts of demand from investment banks and structured 
investment vehicles [SIVs].” His counterparties were non-US banks and SIVs attracted to the 
CDOs’ substantial yields. The buyers were not naive or stupid, he said, but driven to operate 
in a very competitive setting. The higher yields helped subsidize their core lending 
businesses, which were far less profitable. He described a herd effect as the CDO bubble 
expanded: 
A little portfolio emerges in one or more of the more aggressive corporate banks. And 
then the other corporate banks that are near the corporate banks say, “Hold on. How 
427
Lessons Learned: Stephen King Lieber and Kasoff

--- Page 6 ---
are they managing to price their middle -market lending 2 basis points inside what 
we’re doing?” 
The credit investors followed each other as they were trying to maintain a commercially 
viable and competitive bank lending business amidst low rates. They realized, “I can get 350 
to 400 [basis point spread] on this synthetic tranche. Well, I do n’t even need to do much of 
that now to offset a huge amount. So, let’s allocate some more capital to that. Well, now we’re 
even more successful.” The bullish sentiment favoring CDOs persisted into 2007, even with 
housing prices deteriorating, limiting any short positions in King’s hedged book. 
Many CDO investors anticipated having to ride out a housing slump —the distressed 
assets would recover—but the dash for cash forced them to sell at huge losses. 
The fire sale came in 2008 and escalated with a vengeanc e. Thanks to disciplined hedging, 
King’s group survived with profits, but it was tough going. For many CDO investors, the 
thinking had been, “We are golden, as long as we don’t have to mark to market.” Then came 
the realization that, “Oh, ----. If the borr owers can’t refinance, then those historic numbers 
are garbage.” Next, a tap on the shoulder: “Can you get rid of that portfolio?” Now, the loss is 
crystallized. King had long been bearish, but “I’m not even sure we considered quite the way 
it would have gone from the mortgage market to the banking to the sovereigns.” 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: April 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021-11 
 
428
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1