--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
Reserve Requirements Survey Reserve Requirements Survey 
June Rhee 
Yale School of Management 
Carey K. Mott 
Yale School of Management 
Greg Feldberg 
Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Rhee, June; Mott, Carey K.; Feldberg, Greg; and Metrick, Andrew (2022) "Reserve Requirements Survey," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 4, 133-149. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1441 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/5 
This Survey is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This survey is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol4/iss4/5

--- Page 3 ---
Reserve Requirements Survey1 
June Rhee,2 Carey K. Mott,3 Greg Feldberg,4 and Andrew Metrick5 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Survey 
December 22, 2022 
Abstract 
Banks have a private motive to hold some level of cash and liquid reserves, but the negative 
externalities of bank runs create a public interest in setting a regulatory level higher than the 
privately optimal level. We can think of such reserve requirements (RRs) as the original form 
of liquidity regulation. In this paper, we fo cus on 14 cases in which central banks adjusted 
RRs after crises hit, typically to deal with liquidity shortages in the banking system.  We 
observe that RR adjustments have several advantages in a crisis: ( 1) such changes require 
little process, and the change for banks can be quick; (2) stigma concerns may be much lower 
than with emergency  lending operations; ( 3) RRs can be used to  fine-tune incentives for 
holding various types and maturities of assets; and (4) RR easing can complement a central 
bank’s other liquidity support programs. 
Keywords: financial crisis intervention, liquidity, liquidity regulation, reserve requirement 
  
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Pr ogram on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering the adjustment of reserve requirements. Cases are available from the Journal of Financial 
Crises at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Director, MMS in Systemic Risk, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
3 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
4 Research Scholar and Director of Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
5 Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of Management. 
133

--- Page 4 ---
Introductory Note: This survey is an analysis of important considerations for policymakers 
seeking to adjust reserve requirements in response to a financial crisis. It is based on insights 
derived from case studies of 14 specific reserve requirement programs the Yale Program on 
Financial Stability has completed and from the existing literature on the topic. While this 
survey can help inform a decision about whether or not to adjust reserve requirements, our 
main purpose is to assist policymakers who have already made that dec ision in designing 
the most effective program possible. In analyzing the programs that are the focus of this 
survey, we used a color -coded system to highlight certain particularly noteworthy design 
features. 
Treatment Meaning 
BLUE – INTERESTING A design feature that is interesting and that 
policymakers may want to consider. Typically, 
this determination is based on the observation 
that the design feature involves a unique and 
potentially promising way of addressing a 
challenge common to this type of program that 
may not be obvious. Less commonly, empirical 
evidence or a consensus will indicate that the 
design feature was effective in this context, in 
which case we will describe that evidence or 
consensus. 
YELLOW – CAUTION INDICATED A design feature that policymakers should 
exercise caution in considering. Typically, this 
determination is based on the observation that 
the designers of the feature later made 
significant changes to the feature with the 
intention of improving the program. Less 
commonly, empirical evidence or a consensus 
will indicate that the design feature was 
ineffective in this context, in which case we will 
describe that evidence or consensus. 
This highlighting is not intended to be dispositive. The fact that a design feature is not  
highlighted or is highlighted yellow does not mean that it should not be considered or that it 
will never be effective under any circumstances. Similarly, the fact that a design feature is 
not highlighted or is highlighted blue does not mean that it shoul d always be considered or 
will be effective under all circumstances. The highlighting is our subjective attempt to guide 
readers toward certain design features that (1) may not be obvious but are worth 
considering or (2) require caution. 
  
134
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
Introduction 
All banks have a private motive to hold some cash reserves, but the negative externalities of 
bank runs create a public interest in setting a regulatory ratio higher than the privately 
optimal level. We can think of such reserve requirements (RRs) as the original form of 
liquidity regulation, the practice of which has evolved from the simple ratios of the old days 
to the complex calculations underlying the rules of Basel III. 
This paper surveys 14 cases covering the adjustment of RRs in response to a financial crisis. 
RR adjustments have several advantages in a crisis. Perhaps the most important  advantage 
is speed. For the central bank, adjusting RR s requires little more than a press release ; and 
the result for banks is aut omatic—they immediately have access to a potentially significant 
amount of liquidity that had previously been restricted or stuck at the central bank. Second, 
stigma concerns may be much lower than  with emergency lending operations because RR 
adjustments typically apply to many or all banks at the same time in the same way . Third, 
the authorities can fine -tune incentives for financial institutions by adjusting and 
differentiating elements of RRs. Fourth, RR easing can complement a central bank’ s other 
liquidity support programs. 
The main drawback to the use of RRs is that they are relatively weak compared to other crisis 
interventions. Nobody should expect that a change in RRs will fix a crisis by itself: compared 
to “direct” injections of liquidity or capital, changes in RR ratios are “indirect,” as they require 
active bank participation. Nevertheless, in combination with other interventions, RR 
adjustments can be a force multiplier in crisis response. Their usage in recent years, 
alongside the innovation of more complex liquidity rules, suggests central banks continue to 
see RRs as a valuable crisis-fighting tool. 
Figure 1 shows all the cases covered in this survey. We use country names and a date or crisis 
acronym to refer to the cases in the text. 
  
135
Reserve Requirements Rhee et al.

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1: Programs Covered in This Survey 
Case title Reference 
Argentina: Reserve Requirements, 1994–1995 Leonard 2022 
Brazil: Reserve Requirements, GFC Fulmer 2022 
China: Reserve Requirements, GFC Mott 2022a 
China: Reserve Requirements, 2015–2016 Mott 2022b 
Colombia: Reserve Requirements, GFC Leonard and Decker 2022 
Czech Republic: Reserve Requirements, 1997  Hoffner 2022a 
India: Reserve Requirements, GFC Nunn and Mott 2022 
Jamaica: Reserve Requirements, GFC Runkel 2022a 
Malaysia: Reserve Requirements, AFC Decker 2022 
Peru: Reserve Requirements, GFC Fulmer and Decker 2022 
Russia: Reserve Requirements, 1998  Hoffner 2022b 
Russia: Reserve Requirements, GFC Hoffner 2022c 
Thailand: Reserve Requirements, AFC Runkel and Vergara 2022 
Venezuela: Reserve Requirements, GFC Runkel 2022b 
Sources: Decker 2022; Fulmer 2022; Fulmer and Decker 2022; Hoffner 2022a; Hoffner 2022b; Hoffner 2022c; 
Leonard 2022; Leonard and Decker 2022; Mott 2022a; Mott 2022b; Nunn and Mott 2022; Runkel 2022a;  Runkel 
2022b; Runkel and Vergara 2022. 
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: What was the purpose of adjusting RRs? 
Outside financial crises , central banks use RRs for several purposes , most often to “lean 
against the wind” and promote financial stability during credit expansions. In many cases in 
this survey, the reversal of such tightening was an early response to an acute crisis. For 
example, before the Global Financial Crisis of 2007 –2009 (GFC), Colombia and India used 
RRs to curtail excessive credit growth but then reversed course to release liquidity tied up 
at the central bank. Similarly, in the mid-1990s, the central bank of Russia managed RR policy 
to support its primary objective of supporting ruble stability; when the Ruble Crisis hit in 
1998, it lowered RRs to provide liquidity to domestic banks and restore the functioning of 
the payment system (CBR 1998; 1999, 6–7). Later, in the early 2000s, Russia’s central bank 
used RRs to limit domestic banks’ exposure to forei gn borrowings and to maintain banking 
sector stability; when the GFC erupted, the central bank lowered RRs so the banks could use 
funds released from reserves to maintain liquidity and settle payments. The central bank of 
Peru used RRs to lengthen the maturity of banks’ liabilities because short-term liabilities are 
typically more vulnerable to runs or sudden capital outflows . It responded to a surge of 
136
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 7 ---
capital inflows in September 2007 by removing RRs on banks’ long-term external liabilities 
to promote long-term, rather than short-term, capital inflows; five months later, it began a 
series of RR hikes on other liabilities to strengthen the banking sector . When the GFC 
unfolded, the central bank reversed RR hikes to release banks’ liquidity . Several central 
banks also used RRs during the GFC to redistribute liquidity in the banking system. For 
example, Brazil’s central bank observed that the GFC did not cause deposits to leave Brazil 
systematically—rather, the crisis concentrated deposits among a few large institutions that 
depositors considered relatively safe. Through RR adjustments, the central bank attempted 
to reverse this accumulation of deposits among the largest banks of Brazil. 
Authorities can use RR adjustments as an  expression of government policy support for 
certain types of companies or industries, both in normal times and when specific sectors are 
under unique stress. For example, China adopted two-tier RRs with higher ratios applied to 
the largest commercial banks and lower ratios to smaller commercial banks and urban and 
rural credit cooperatives. The central bank initially tested the two -tier RRs in response to a 
series of natural disasters in 2008. During the GFC, the central bank explained that the tiered 
RR structure was part of a broader principle of “differentiated treatment to different 
sectors,” which included credit allocation to the agricultural sector (PBOC 2009, 51). 
During the Asian Financial Crisis  (AFC) of the late 1990s , the Bank of Thailand repeatedly 
expanded the list of reserve assets that healthy banks could use to satisfy the RR to meet 
several policy purposes. Early on, it encouraged healthy banks to support illiquid banks by 
allowing them to count their loans to a government liquidity fund as reserve assets. Later, it 
adjusted its definition of eligible reserve assets for broader policy purposes beyond liquidity 
provision—to encourage banks to provide funding to restructured banks and to government 
agencies and state enterprises , which ultimately included the Export -Import Bank of 
Thailand. Although this form of intervention has some risk attached, we believe it is an 
interesting strategy to be considered in cases when the central bank is constrained in direct 
liquidity provision. 
In the early stages of the GFC,  investors sold Jamaican -dollar assets in favor of foreign  
currency assets seen as safe stores of value amid uncertainty and following the downgrades 
of Jamaican national debt by th e three major rating agencies. The sales of Jamaican -dollar 
assets created “extraordinary foreign exchange needs” for Jamaican financial and 
nonfinancial businesses (BOJ 2008) . Around the same time, the maturation of Bank of 
Jamaica (BOJ) and Government of  Jamaica securities yielded further Jamaican -dollar 
liquidity to bondholders. The BOJ sought to discourage those bondholders from swapping 
Jamaican dollars for foreign currencies, which would have put further pressure on the value 
of the Jamaican dollar. To do so, the BOJ raised reserve requirements for banks’ holdings of 
Jamaican-dollar assets on three occasions. 
137
Reserve Requirements Rhee et al.

--- Page 8 ---
2. Part of a Package : Did the central bank have lender-of-last-resort authority to 
back up liquidity provision through RR adjustments? Did any other interventions 
accompany the RR adjustments? 
Banks may be more willing to use built -up liquidity buffers, such as reserves,  if the central 
bank provides liquidity backstops at the same time (BIS 2012). Many jurisdictions in our 
survey directly inject ed liquidity when lowering RRs. For example, Peru expanded its 
repurchase agreement (repo) operations, introduced a new swap facility, and repurchased 
certificates of deposit (CDs) from banks. During the GFC , Russia also provided emergency 
lending, but this initiative required additional legislation by the parliament, thus taking 
longer to launch than the RR adjustments. 
In 1998 , Russia reduced individual banks’ RR s on a case -by-case basis to facilitate three 
multilateral clearing operations that reduced banks’ interbank liabilities. The central bank 
had information on each bank’s outstanding liabilities to clients , other banks, and the 
government. With this information, over a weekend, the central bank provided participants 
with an overnight loan to settle end -of-day balances. If a bank still needed funds to settle, it 
could draw down the reserves it held at the central bank. The central bank did not make 
foreign currency available to banks while the multilateral clearing operations took place, to 
prevent banks from immediately selling the additional ruble funds they received for settling 
balances on the foreign exchange market. 
In some cases , jurisdictions imposed relatively high RR s to make up for a relatively weak 
lender-of-last-resort (LOLR) authority. Also, central banks with limited ability to act as LOLR 
or offer deposit insurance used RR adjustment s as their main tool to provide liquidity  in 
crisis times. For example,  heading into the Mexican Peso Crisis of 1994–1995, Argentina’s 
central bank had limited LOLR capacity—up to 20% of the monetary base, which the central 
bank nearly exceeded during the crisis—and did not have deposit insurance; that facility was 
introduced only later into the crisis. Therefore, authorities relied on RR adjustments to 
release liquidity quickly. 
In Brazil, RR policy was the central bank’s main tool for providing liquidity at the onset of  
the GFC. Legislation prohibited the central bank from using public money to rescue financial 
institutions unless it was extending discount window loans with maturities of less than 360 
days. Regardless, central bank officials said political pressure and scrutiny from the National 
Congress and the public had discouraged the use of LOLR policy . The central bank was not 
formally an independent institution, and central bank officials were liable for their actions 
for up to five years after leaving office—a threat of legal action the officials took  seriously 
due to precedents. This structure greatly constrains an effective crisis response. 
3. Legal Authority: Which body had the legal authority to adjust RRs? 
Generally, central banks had discretion in their enabling legislation  to adjust RR  policy. 
However, a small number of central banks required the government’s approval. 
In China, the central bank required the State Council’s approval to adjust RRs. However, some 
sources suggest that the approval process was not as rigorous for RR operations as for other 
138
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 9 ---
monetary policy decisions under the central bank ’s authority. Malaysia’s government also 
required the central bank to obtain the finance minister’s approval before raising RRs. 
Occasionally, law s constrained central bank s’ ability to adjust RR policy  by limiting how 
much they could adjust the RR at one time. For example, in Jamaica, the central bank could 
adjust a RR only once a month and by no more than 200 basis points (bps); as a result, the 
central bank needed three months to raise RRs by 500 bp s in 2008–2009. Russia’s central 
bank could not change a RR more than 500 bps at a time. 
4. Administration: What was the process for adjusting RRs? 
Generally, c entral banks followed independent internal process es in deciding whether to 
alter RRs. A minority of countries’ central banks needed to coordinate with other 
government entities. For example, China’s central bank administered RR policy under the 
guidance of the State Council. Malaysia’s central bank administered changes to the RR with 
approval from the finance minister. The finance minister had authority to issue binding 
directives against the central bank’s proposed actions, and if the central bank objected to the 
finance minister’s override, the House of Representatives heard both sides’ reas oning. I t 
remains unclear who made the final decision. 
In Brazil, the National Monetary Council set RR policy. Its members consisted of the minister 
of state for finance ; minister of state for planning, budget , and management ; and the 
president of the central bank. However, the central bank president was the main driver of 
RR decisions. 
In some cases, regulated financial entities were involved in setting RR policies. For example, 
in Russia, the central bank’s board of directors  administered RRs in coord ination with the 
central bank branches and with some participation from the A ssociation of Russian Banks, 
an interest group of Russian commercial banks . Certainly, any input from regulated 
institutions must be treated with caution. 
5. Governance: Did the body responsible for adjusting RR s have any legal mandate 
on reporting, or did it receive any oversight on the process of adjusting RRs? 
Most central banks were not subject to mandated reporting obligations or oversight for RR 
adjustments. Regardless, some central banks incorporated accountability into their 
practices. For example, although t he Reserve Bank of India Act , 1934,  did not formally 
prescribe oversight or accountability policies, the central bank employed various practices 
to ensure its policymaking was transparent. This approach included publicizing its policy 
rationale and potential or expected outcomes. The governor of the central bank also held a 
quarterly press conference after every policy review. 
A minority of central banks were obligated  to report to their legislatures  about their  RR 
operations. In  Argentina, the central bank  reported annually on its operations to the 
Congress. In China, the central bank submitted reports on monetary policy operations to the 
Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress and recorded its monetary policy 
decisions and procedures for the State Council. 
139
Reserve Requirements Rhee et al.

--- Page 10 ---
6. Communication: How was the adjustment of RR s announced to the market or 
public? 
The central banks in the cases surveyed were clear in communicating that they intended RR 
adjustments to deal with sudden stress in the financial system from the onset of a financial 
crisis. Some—Argentina, India, Malaysia, and Russia—emphasized the temporary nature of 
such policy changes at the announcement of the RR adjustment. 
7. Assets Qualifying as Reserves: What types of assets satisfied RRs? 
Reservable assets generally consisted of  cash in local or foreign currency  and sometimes 
included treasuries or other assets like cash. The relative proportions of cash held at the 
bank, cash and securities held at the  central bank, and other reservable assets at the bank 
are important to consider when evaluating the impact of RR adjustments. The prop ortions 
differed in each jurisdiction. Some countries—China, Czech Republic, Malaysia, Venezuela—
required all RR funds to be held with the central bank. Some —Peru, Thailand —required 
financial institutions to hold a specific portion of their required reserv es with the central 
bank and allowed them to hold the remainder in various acceptable reserve assets. Others—
Argentina, India, Jamaica —employed an additional liquidity requirement that essentially 
functioned in the same way. 
Sometimes, central banks expanded the assets that qualified as reserves when adjusting RR. 
For example, India allowed banks to count as reserve assets their holdings of assets funded 
with the government’s Liquidity Adjustment Facility. 
Early in the AFC, the central bank of Thailand enco uraged healthy banks to support illiquid 
banks by allowing them to count their loans to a government liquidity fund as reserve assets. 
As the crisis deepened, a newly created state -owned bank and new financial company 
absorbed the failed banks and financial companies. After this consolidation, the central bank 
expanded assets satisfying the RR to include the debt of these new entities. After the crisis, 
it also added the Export-Import Bank of Thailand to the list to promote the export sector. 
8. Reservable Liabilities: Against which liabilities could financial institutions hold 
the liquid assets under RRs? 
In calculating RRs, often liabilities included or excluded from the calculation were explicitly 
listed in the relevant regulations. Generally, the reservable  liabilities consisted of time, 
savings, and checking deposits. They often excluded subordinated debt. Shareholder capital 
is not a liability, by definition, but several central banks, to avoid confusion, explicitly noted 
that banks were not required to hold reserves against it. 
India, Thailand, and Venezuela required banks to hold reserves against various types of 
nondeposit liabilities. India included external debts. Thailand included short -term foreign 
liabilities and other borrowings with index -linked r eturns or embedded financial 
derivatives. Venezuela included debts to export finance companies and public housing funds. 
140
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 11 ---
During a crisis, central banks could change the reservable liabilities composition to motivate 
lending to a certain sector. For example, China’s central bank differentiated RRs by business 
type or lending portfolio; it applied lower RRs to agricultural banks and required banks to 
have a certain portion of agricultural loans in their portfolios to qualify for lower RRs. 
The composition of reservable liabilities may affect the behavior of banks in normal times 
and sometimes affect the ability of RR adjustments to provide liquidity during crisis times. 
For example, in Brazil, time deposits have been the most important source of domestic 
funding for Brazilian banks since the 1990s, partly because the central bank has applied high 
rates to demand and savings deposits. 
In Argentina, a similar kind of migration to funding with a lower or no RR during normal 
times affected the ability of the central bank to use an RR adjustment to provide appropriate 
liquidity during crisis times. T he central bank relied on lowering the RR as the main tool to 
provide emergency liquidity. However, the RR applied to time deposits was much lower than 
the RR applied to checking and overnight savings accounts in normal times; this disparity 
created an unequal distribution of liquidity. When the crisis hit, time deposits showed a 
higher propensity for runs. The central bank concluded that the unequal imposition of RRs 
in normal times had parked liquidity in the wrong place.  Also, the interbank market proved 
to be a poor channel for transmission of liquidity across institutions in a systemic crisis 
because time deposits were held mostly by investment banks. 
If a central bank  plans to rely on RR adjustments as a major tool for providing emergency 
liquidity, it should ensure that the RR framework accurately reflects the potential risks in the 
financial system to build up funds where they will be most needed, and unequal imposit ion 
of RRs does not create a migration of funding to riskier sources. 
9. Computation: What elements went into calculating RRs? 
Central banks expressed ordinary RRs as the ratio of required reserve assets to a bank’s 
reservable liabilities. As Figure 2 shows, jurisdictions differed in how they calculated the RR 
(Della Valle, King, and Veyrune 2022). Some elements considered included: 
(i) How long the maintenance period should be. The maintenance period is the length 
of time during which financial institutions must maintain the specified level of 
required reserve funds. 
(ii) Whether to require financial institutions to meet the RR on a specific date or on 
average over the maintenance period. Averaging gives financial institutions the 
flexibility to allow  their reserves to sometimes fall below the requirement during 
the maintenance period. 
(iii) Whether to calculate the reserve requirement based on financial institutions’ 
liabilities over the same time as the maintenance period (contemporaneous 
accounting) or ov er an earlier period (lagged accounting). With lagged reserve 
accounting, financial institutions can be certain about their required reserves; in a 
contemporaneous framework,  they may have an incentive to set aside more 
141
Reserve Requirements Rhee et al.

--- Page 12 ---
reserves than necessary to make sure  they don’t fall below their requirements. 
(Montoro and Moreno 2011, 56) 
Figure 2: RR Computation Pre-crisis 
Case Averaging Maintenance period Lagged Notes 
Argentina 1994–1995 Yes 1 month No  
Brazil GFC Yes 
1–2 weeks 
(depended on  
deposit type) 
Yes 
Half-lagged to lagged 
measure; also depended on 
deposit type 
China GFC No 10 days Yes  
China 2015–2016   Yes(a) 10 days Yes  
Colombia GFC Yes 2 weeks Yes  
Czech Republic 1997  Yes 2 weeks     N/A(b)  
India GFC Yes 2 weeks N/A Likely lagged, but unclear 
Jamaica GFC Yes 1 month N/A Likely lagged, but unclear 
Malaysia AFC Yes 2 weeks N/A  
Peru GFC Yes 1 month No  
Russia 1998  Yes 25 days Yes Between the 5th and 30th day 
of the month 
Russia GFC Yes 1 month No 
Central bank could require 
banks to compute RR ratios 
before the official reporting 
deadline 
Thailand AFC Yes 
1–2 weeks 
(depended on  
institution type) 
No  
Venezuela GFC N/A N/A N/A  
(a) In September 2015, the central bank changed from a time -point framework to an averaging method. 
(b) N/A = not available. 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
In response to a crisis, authorities can provide liquidity not only by changing the RR itself 
but also by adjusting a certain part of the ratio calculation. For example, in Malaysia during 
the AFC, the central bank  gave banking ins titutions more flexibility in their daily liquidity 
operations by widening the band for the permissible daily variation in the average balances 
required to meet the RR. During the GFC, Russia raised and expanded its av eraging ratio,6 
 
6 Banks kept most required reserve funds in idle accounts with the central bank, which allowed banks that met 
certain prudential criteria to meet a maximum percentage (the averaging ratio) of their RR ratios using the 
monthly average balance of their correspondent accounts with the central bank. Correspondent accounts were 
liquid accounts at a local central bank branch that banks used for interbank payments. 
142
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 13 ---
which gave eligible banks access to some of their otherwise idle required reserve funds as a 
source of additional liquidity. 
Central banks also could set marginal reserve requirements. In these cases, the RR ratio 
denominator was the change in a bank’s liabilities over a set time or above a threshold level 
of liabilities. For example, Colombia in 2007 introduced a marginal RR on deposit liabilities 
above the level of May 7, 2007, to lean against credit growth  then eliminated this marginal 
RR in the second half of August 2008 at the onset of the GFC. Similarly, Peru introduced a 
marginal RR to temper short -term capital inflows and reinforce the banking sector for 
increases in domestic currency –denominated liabilities but eliminated this margi nal RR 
during the GFC. Venezuela also cut its marginal RR during the GFC to increase bank liquidity. 
10. Eligible Institutions: Which financial institutions were  subject to RRs and RR 
adjustments? 
All central banks’ RRs applied to commercial banks and other depository institutions. Other 
financial institutions  could also be obligated to satisfy RRs . Venezuela required money  
market mutual funds to hold reserves with the central bank. Peru applied its RRs to a wide 
category of financial institutions, including municipal funds and small and microenterprise 
development entities. 
Argentina included investment banks and mortgage banks. However, attempts to use RR cuts 
to promote liquidity during a crisis revealed some shortcomings of the RR framework. 
Lowering RRs did little to resolve  liquidity problems because the institutions experiencing 
runs were investment banks offe ring time deposits. Although the liabilities of investment 
banks were included in the RR framework, these bore low or no RRs. The central bank then 
had to increase RRs on banks in the middle of a crisis to raise funds to lend to the troubled 
investment banks. 
Among the financial institutions required to hold reserves, those with a greater need for 
liquidity often saw deeper central bank s cuts to  the RR. For example, in 2015 –2016 the 
Chinese central bank reduced RRs for all deposit-taking institutions but applied a lower RR 
to small and rural institutions, as they had a greater need for liquidity, among other reasons. 
During a later period of RR easing, China again cut RRs for all banks , but the Agricultural 
Bank of China received a greater reduction to its RR. 
In some instances, the central banks differentiate d RRs on an individual -institution basis. 
During the Ruble Crisis , Russia  applied a specific RR for each bank while performing 
multilateral clearing operations. The multilateral clearing operations are discussed in more 
detail in Key Design Decision No. 2, Part of a Package. 
11. Timing: As the crisis hit, when did the authorities use RR adjustments? 
RR adjustment is often the first measure a country takes in response to a potential financial 
crisis, a run , or other stress in the banking system. For example, Argentina during the 
Mexican Peso Crisis quickly acted to adjust RRs when its peso devalued sharply in December 
1994. During the GFC, Russia, China, Brazil , and Colombia adjusted their RRs in the same 
143
Reserve Requirements Rhee et al.

--- Page 14 ---
month or right before Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. RR adjustments in Peru, India, 
Thailand, and Venezuela came slightly later —however, when their central banks felt the 
repercussions of the GFC hit their jurisdiction s, they soon reduced their RRs. Colombia had 
a two-month gap between the announcement of the RR adjustments and the date they took 
effect. In Jamaica, where the central bank faced limits on the size of monthly RR changes, the 
central bank had to adjust the RR over three months to reach its targeted ratio. 
Malaysia did not cut the RR until the second phase of its crisis. In its initial response, the 
central bank cut the policy rate and the government attempted, without success, to borrow 
on international capital markets. Only later, during a period of tightened fiscal and monetary 
policy to contain inflationary pressures, did the central bank , having noticed disruption to 
corporate borrowers’ access to credit, lower RR s to encourage financial institutions to 
finance productive economic activity. 
12. Changes in Reserve Requirements: What elements in the RRs changed? 
Figure 3 lists the RR adjustments in the surveyed cases. Some countries differentiated RR 
adjustments among currency, maturity , and types of liabilities. Further discussio n on the 
denominator of RR ratio calculation may be found in Key Design Decision No. 8, Reservable 
Liabilities. Argentina, instead of cutting the RR, lowered its minimum cash requirement for 
the RR, to release liquidity. In Venezuela, the central bank cut only the marginal RR. 
Figure 3 also shows the amount of liquidity released based on data the central bank or 
International Monetary Fund supplied. In some cases, a proxy for banking sector liquidity is 
used; for example, China in 2015–2016 released a figure for the actual decline in bank 
reserves after the RR cut. The actual impact of the liquidity, however, depends on other 
factors including conditions around reservable assets and remuneration on those assets held 
at the central bank, and therefore does not directly translate into the amount of liquidity 
banks made available to the market or themselves through the RR adjustments. For example, 
during the GFC, various industry officials  in the country  stated that the R eserve Bank of 
India’s policy rate cuts, including the reduction to the  RR, had not led to adequate credit 
expansion, and the then –commerce and industry minister remarked that fresh liquidity 
released had not reached “cash-starved industry and consumers” (Dhasmana 2009). 
 
144
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 3: RR Changes and Liquidity Released 
Case RR range Eligible Liabilities 
Liquidity released 
(USD) 
Argentina  
1994–1995(a) 
43%–30% 
3%–1% 
demand and savings deposits 
time deposits  4 billion__  
Brazil GFC 
53%–42% 
30%–20% 
8%–9% 
demand deposits 
savings deposits 
time deposits  
71 billion__  
China GFC 17.5%–15.5% headline rate for large financial institutions 117 billion__  
China 2015–2016 20%–17.5% headline rate for large financial institutions 330 billion(b)  
Colombia GFC 
40%–11% 
35%–11% 
7.5%–4.5% 
checking accounts 
savings accounts 
time deposits 
— 
Czech Republic 1997  11.5%–9.5% all 0.66 billion(c)  
India GFC 9%–5% 
25%–24% 
cash reserve requirement 
statutory liquidity ratio 40.9 billion__ 
Jamaica GFC 9%–14% 
23%–28% 
cash  
liquid assets (0.17 billion)(d)  
Malaysia AFC 13.5%–4% all 9.7 billion(e) 
Peru GFC 9%–6% 
40%–0% 
ordinary RR 
marginal RR 0.75 billion__ 
Russia 1998  
16%–5% 
13%–5% 
10%–5% 
demand and time liabilities up to 30 days 
time liabilities of 31–90 days 
time liabilities of more than 90 days 
2.8 billion(b) 
Russia GFC 
8.5%–0.5% 
6.5%–0.5% 
5.5%–0.5% 
liabilities to foreign banks 
other liabilities 
liabilities to individuals in rubles 
14.1 billion__ 
Thailand AFC 7%–6% all 1.52 billion__ 
Venezuela GFC 30%–17% marginal RR 2.8 billion__ 
(a) These changes apply to the  minimum cash requirement within the RR. The authorities announced that 
these resulted in an indirect average RR cut of 21% to 14% for all deposits.  
(b) These figures are not specifically liquidity released but a decline in bank reserves (China 2015–2016) and 
a decline in required reserve account balances (Russia 1998), representing the amount actually drawn 
down through the cuts to RRs. 
(c) This figure reflects the May 1997 cut only; the central bank cut the reserve requirement ratio three more 
times during July 1998–October 1999. About half of this figure was sterilized through requiring importers 
to deposit a certain percentage of the value of their imports with the central bank. 
(d) Jamaica increased the RR to prevent its currency from sharply depreciating; the figure presented 
represents liquidity absorbed. This is the only case in the survey covering a country that increased the RR. 
(e) Out of USD 9.7 billion, the first RR adjustment released USD 5.8 billion, which was sterilized, and the later 
adjustment released USD 3.9 billion, which was not sterilized.  
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
145
Reserve Requirements Rhee et al.

--- Page 16 ---
13. Changes in Interest/Remuneration: Were changes  made to remuneration on 
assets held in an account with the central bank as required reserves? 
Among the cases reviewed, five central banks had the authority to pay interest on the portion 
of reserves held at the central bank—Brazil, China, Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela. However, 
although Peru and Venezuela had the authority to remunerate, they did not do so. Colombia 
ultimately stopped remunerating reserves on July 24, 2009. Argentina amended the relevant 
law in 2001, after the crisis, allowing the central bank to remunerate reserves. Of course, as 
noted, several central banks allowed financial institutions to hold reserve assets other than 
cash or deposits with the central bank , such as government securities, that  typically paid 
interest. 
Brazil’s RRs included ordinary reserves, which paid low or no interest; extraordinary reserves, 
which the Banco Central do Brasil required banks to hold in cash; and a government bond–
holding requirement. Both the extraordinary cash reserves and the government bonds earned 
interest at the central bank’s target policy rate. During the GFC, Brazil also introduced a 
temporary RR that forced banks to move their time deposit reserves from government bonds 
to unremunerated reserves unless they provided liquidity to smaller banks. 
14. Other Restrictions: Did any other conditions or restrictions accompany the 
adjustments to RRs? 
Sometimes, central banks attached additional conditions to direct liquidity released by 
adjustments to RRs to a specific use by the banks and financial institutions. In Russia in 1998, 
the central bank allowed the banks to use funds in the reserves to settle and clear interbank 
liabilities. 
In Brazil, the central bank’s RR policy had an unusual component that we didn’t see in other 
cases: it allowed banks to deduct part of their required reserves by fixed amounts, varying 
for the three types of RRs . The deductibles effectively lowered the RR burden for relatively 
small banks. In particular, t he government bond –holding RR had a high deductible that 
effectively exempted most small and medium -sized banks. In addition, d uring the GFC, the 
central bank allowed the largest six banks to deduct loan portfolio purchases from the 
remaining 97 banks  from their government bond –holding RR . With this deduction, the 
central bank attempted to voluntarily shift reserves from large banks to smaller banks. 
Argentina, India, Peru, and Russia imposed fines on banks that fell short of the RR. In Russia, 
the central bank waived the fine for noncompliance during the period of RR adjustment. 
15. Impact on Monetary Policy Transmission: Did the release of liquidity through an 
adjustment to the RR have any impact on monetary or macroprudential policies, 
or did the authorities implement sterilizing measures for the additional liquidity 
released? 
Generally, there was no sterilization for the additional liquidity provided by lowering RRs. 
However, the Czech Republic and Malaysia did attempt to sterilize. The Czech Republic 
partially sterilized the additional liquidity through the government’s new import deposit 
146
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 17 ---
scheme, in which importers of select goods had to deposit 20% of their imports’ value with 
the central bank  for a six-month period. The central bank also sterilized a l owering of RRs 
through repo transactions. 
The Malaysian central bank initially sterilized additional liquidity by reducing direct lending 
to the interbank market. However, its later lowering of the RR remained unsterilized as the 
central bank determined that its overall policy package had successfully reduced inflation. 
16. Duration: Did the authorities announce an end date for the RR adjustment? 
Most of the central banks in the cases surveyed did not announce an end date, although many 
emphasized the temporary nature of the RR adjustments. A Bank for International 
Settlements report suggests that banks and other financial institutions will be more willing 
to use the released liquidity if the authority can credibly convince the market that it is 
committed to keeping reserve requirements low until banks have sufficient time to rebuild 
buffers (BIS 2012). 
In both the  Ruble Crisis and the GFC , Russia  explicitly stated an end  date. As each crisis 
persisted, the central bank  ultimately postponed the date at which it would return RRs to 
pre-crisis levels. In Argentina, the initial announcement of the RR adjustment did not include 
a specific end date, but the central bank did announce one a few weeks later. 
Conclusion 
The literature assessing the effectiveness of RR adjustments in response to financial crises is 
limited. Often, the RR adjustments were accompanied by other liquidity providing 
interventions; thus, isolating the effect of the adjustments in providing liquidity relief to 
financial institutions is difficult. Many central banks published the amount of liquidity they 
expected to release through RR adjustments. However, a bank or financial institution did not 
necessarily use the released funds to deal with liquidity shortages within the institution or 
extend loans. 
Nevertheless, we find that a close examination of 14 cases suggests that RR adjustments have 
several advantages in a crisis: ( 1) they require little process , and the change for banks can 
be quick; (2) stigma concerns may be much lower than with emergency lending operations; 
(3) RRs can be used to fine-tune incentives for holding various types and maturities of assets; 
and (4) RR easing can complement a central bank’s other liquidity support programs. 
References 
Bank for International Settlements  (BIS). 2012. Operationalising the Selection and 
Application of Macroprudential Instruments: Report Submi tted by a Working Group 
Established by the Committee on the Global Financial System.  Bank for International 
Settlements, Committee on the Global Financial System, Paper No. 48, December 2012.   
147
Reserve Requirements Rhee et al.

--- Page 18 ---
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/operationalising-selection-and-application-
macroprudential-instruments 
Bank of Jamaica (BOJ). 2008. “News Release.” November 18, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/21822 
Central Bank of the Russian Federation (CBR). 1998. “Legal Status.” Webpage. 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/legal-status-july-12-1998 
———. 1999. Annual Report 1998.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/annual-report-1998-0 
Decker, Bailey. 2022. “Malaysia: Reserve Requirements, AFC.” Journal of Financial Crises  4, 
no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/24/ 
Della Valle, Guido, Darryl King, and Romain Veyrune. 2022. “Reserve Requirements.” In 
Monetary and Capital Markets Department: Technical Assistance Handbook. Washington, DC: 
International Monetary Fund.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/monetary-and-capital-markets-department-technical-
assistance-handbook-reserve-requirements 
Dhasmana, Indivjal. 2009. “Bank Funds Not Reaching Industry, Consumers: Nath.” Press 
Trust of India, January 30, 2009. Press Trust of India.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/20091 
Fulmer, Sean. 2022. “Brazil: Reserve Requirements, GFC.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/17/ 
Fulmer, Sean, and Bailey Decke r. 2022. “Peru: Reserve Requirements, GFC.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 4.  
 https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/25/ 
Hoffner, Ben jamin. 2022a. “Czech Republic: Reserve Requirements, 1997.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/21/ 
———. 2022b. “Russia: Reserve Requirements, 1998.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/26/ 
———. 2022c. “Russia: Reserve Requirements, GFC.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/27/ 
Leonard, Natalie. 2022. “Argentina: Reserve Requirements, 1994–1995.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/16/ 
148
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 19 ---
Leonard, Natalie, and Bailey Decker. 2022. “Colombia: Reserve Requirements, GFC. ” Journal 
of Financial Crises 4, no. 4.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/20/ 
Montoro, Carlos, and Ramon Moreno. 2011. “The Use of Reserve Requirements as a Policy 
Instrument in Latin America.” Bank for Internationa l Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review 
(March).   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/use-reserve-requirements-policy-instrument-latin-
america 
Mott, Carey. 2022a. “China: Reserve Requirements, GFC.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/18/ 
———. 2022b. “China: Reserve Requirements, 2015–2016.” Journal of Financial Crises 4,   
no. 4.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/19/ 
Nunn, Sharon, and Carey Mott.  2022. “India: Reserve Requirements, GFC.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/22/ 
People’s Bank of China (PBOC). 2009. “China Monetary Policy Report, Quarter Four, 2008.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/china-monetary-policy-report-quarter-four-2008 
Runkel, Corey. 2022a. “Jamaica: Reserve Requirements, GFC.” Journal of Financial Crises  4, 
no. 4.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/23/ 
———. 2022b. “Venezuela: Reserve Requirements, GFC.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/29/ 
Runkel, Corey, and Ezekiel Vergara. 2022. “Thailand: Reserve Requirements, AFC.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 4, no. 4.   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/28/ 
 
Copyright 2022 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
149
Reserve Requirements Rhee et al.