--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Kevin Stiroh Lessons Learned: Kevin Stiroh 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2022) "Lessons Learned: Kevin Stiroh," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 4, 
643-645. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1474 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/38 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss4/38

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Kevin Stiroh 
By Mercedes Cardona  
Kevin Stiroh was head of the Financial Sector Analysis Supervision Group at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York (FRBNY) during the Global Financial Crisis of 200 7–2009 (GFC) . At the 
FRBNY, S tiroh was a leader in the design of the “stress test” for the ban king system , the 
Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) . In the aftermath of the GFC, members of the 
FRBNY, including Stiroh, drafted a report on systemic risk and bank supervision, laying out 
lessons learned from the crisis and their recommendation s. In February 2021, Stiroh  
transitioned from the FRBNY to a leadership position with the Federal Reserve Board where he 
leads the system’s supervisory work related to the financial risks of climate change and chair s 
the Supervision Climate Committee, a ne wly formed Federal Reserve System–wide group that 
will build the system’s capacity regarding the potential impacts of climate on financial 
institutions, infrastructure and markets. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview with 
Stiroh conducted in December 2020; the full transcript can be accessed here. 
Absorb the lessons from prior crises to enhance monitoring systems and future crisis 
response. 
Stiroh noted that, since the GFC, the Fed Board of Governors has modified its approach to 
financial stability assessment and analysis. It now considers how firms interact with each 
other and with marke ts regarding  certain financial assets, looking to assess  how the 
cumulative systemic effects of these interactions might differ from what is observed for any 
individual firm. 
According to Stiroh, t he response to the 2020  COVID-19 pandemic and resulting rec ession 
also demonstrated that policymakers have absorbed other lessons from the GFC, specifically 
in the way they structure and execute programs to provide liquidity and support for the 
economy. He points out,   
Focusing on some of the steps that the centr al bank took, I think there were clear 
lessons that were learned from the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 about the way to 
structure and roll out, communicate and execute the different programs to provide 
credit and liquidity support for the economy. The re was also recognition that this 
shock was different in the sense that it didn ’t emanate from a financial system that 
had a deep weakness due to the assets that it held and the credit that it was exposed 
to. Credit goes to those folks who worked on the facilities during the COVID period to 
know to learn the lessons from the earlier crisis, not just to try to do exactly the same 
thing, because it was a different crisis. I think when we look back, history will say that 
the intervention from the Fed, those who worked on the facilities, had a meaningful, 
positive impact. 
Resources are better spent developing possible interventions for a variety of 
outcomes instead of debating the odds that any one scenario would occur.  
643

--- Page 4 ---
The GFC, and more recently the pa ndemic, were catastrophic events that required a 
proportional response. To prepare for another such upheaval, decisionmakers need to put 
less emphasis on debates about the probability of another crisis  and instead think through 
the possible steps to take if it does happen, said Stiroh.  
We spent a lot of time prior to the financial crisis talking about housing prices, and 
whether there was a bubble, or whether housing prices nationwide could fall a 
dramatic amount. You could have that debate at length, and we did. One lesson would 
be to not necessarily try to come to the definitive answer to a question like that, but 
ask yourself what would be the impact if your assumption is right, and if your 
assumption is wrong, and try to find steps to take that would be robust across a range 
of possible outcomes. 
Operationalizing this thinking requires having a diversity of viewpoints and opinions 
available and channeling them into exercises, analytics, and other tools. He says, 
I don’t think there would be any single silver bullet, but you can do a number of things 
to try to build your capacity. That would include tabletop exercises, different 
analytical tools that you can use to challenge yourself, whether it’s different cognitive 
diversity exercises—pre-mortem exercises is one that we’ve used, where you imagine 
a bad outcome and ask yourself: Now, what are the assumptions? What are the 
actions? What are the steps that might have led to that bad outcome? And what can 
we do about it now to prevent it? 
When designing crisi s interventions, having a multitude of perspectives will deliver 
better results. 
It is helpful to have a range of views, perspectives, and experiences  when studying policy 
alternatives, said Stiroh, especially when considering problems that a re complex and 
uncertain, which is most of the problems that will be encountered in a crisis. “It really does 
help to have people who think about problems in different ways working together,” said 
Stiroh. A diversity of perspectives helps the group “think through intended and unintended 
consequences and come up with better, more robust policy advice ” for policymakers, he 
explained. And that particularly for complex problems, when there ’s uncertainty, it makes 
solutions to those problems more robust than they would be in isolation.  
This approach also fueled the development of the stress test for banks. Just bringing together 
the skillsets of different groups was “enormously valuable” to the response during the GFC, 
said Stiroh.  
Thinking just about the stres s-testing work that we developed primarily through 
2008 and the first half of 2009 —we would have bank examiners, financial analysts, 
economists, accountants, lawyers, and communications people all working together 
to think through these really complex problems. And for me, that was one of the big 
lessons—that you need that kind of multiple diverse perspective to really be able to 
address complex problems. 
644
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
He recalled that during the GFC , several financial agencies  also collaborated on think ing 
through how to address problems in the banking system: 
I remember working very closely with colleagues at the Treasury, at the FDIC, at the 
OCC, at the Fed jointly, thinking about , what are the potential range of adverse 
outcomes for the banking system and how might policy respond to them? There were 
a number of meetings in Washington with colleagues from all the different agencies, 
thinking of ideas, brainstorming, developing pros and  cons for policymakers to 
evaluate. 
Having other professionals with complementary experiences pushes people out of their 
comfort zone, said Stiroh, who added he’s heartened to see that this development has been 
incorporated into the infrastructure of how t he Federal Reserve does supervision, both for 
financial stability purposes and for microprudential purposes. 
Having a flexible, versatile staff that is willing and able to work under pressure and go 
beyond their ordinary duties is invaluable in crisis fighting. 
The Fed staff went far above and beyond the call of duty during the GFC, said Stiroh. The 
commitment of the staff across the system was remarkable, Stiroh noted. 
There were people who were asked to do things they were never trained to do. They 
were asked to work nights and weekends under enormous pressure, both a time 
pressure, but also the pressure of knowing about the importance and the 
consequence of what individuals were working on . Never once did I see somebody 
complain or be unwilling to do what was asked. I ’m sure we didn ’t get everything 
right, but the amount of effort and commitment to trying to achieve the public good 
was absolutely remarkable, and I think that ’s what I ’ll rem ember most about that 
period.  
Teamwork is also important, said Stiroh. As the crisis wore on, the staff had to pivot often 
into new areas, such as the launch of the bank stress tests. He continued,  
People were told to report to duty on this team, or for that project, or to work on this 
topic, and in some cases you had the background and the experience, and in other 
cases you learn from your colleagues. You ask questions. You supported one another, 
and people developed what was needed to answer the question of the day 
Much of the credit goes to the teamwork and dedication of the Fed staff, Stiroh observed.  
Dated: December 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020–28 
 
645
Lessons Learned: Kevin Stiroh Cardona