--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Harry Wilson Lessons Learned: Harry Wilson 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lynch, Mary Anne Chute (2022) "Lessons Learned: Harry Wilson," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 
1, 474-478. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1282 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/26 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/26

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Harry Wilson 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Harry Wilson was one of four senior advisers to the US Department of the Treasury during the 
Obama administration and served on the President’s Task Force on the Auto Industry , which 
was established in 2009 and charged with providing aid to General Motors and Chrysler, and 
later to other entities, to avoid their disorderly failure and the loss of a million or more jobs. 
The Auto Task Force worked  intensively throughout 2009 to swiftly negotiate with the 
corporate leadership, unions, investors, and other stakeholders of the two manufacturers to 
design an orderly restructuring that would put the companies on a path to stability. Wilson led 
the government’s efforts regarding General Motors while it went through its bankruptcy and 
restructuring. This “Lessons Learned” is based on an interview with Mr. Wilson. 
Leaders need to be laser -focused on solving the problem long term , which requires 
them to hire needed experts and keep politics from muddying the waters.  
We asked Wilson about his general views on what makes for a successful team in considering 
the auto rescue. 
In terms of the leaders, you need folks who are laser-focused on solving the problem. 
There’s too much political debate around blaming somebody else or the other side. . . 
Anytime we go through a restructuring, I always make the point: it doesn ’t matter 
how we got here. We need to understand it. We need to fix it. But the most important 
thing is, what do we do from here ? Instead of spending time blaming the past, it ’s 
much more focused on where we are and what we do to fix it. 
The first thing is having a solution -oriented mindset and a fact -based approach, a 
desire to collaborate rather than attack in a two-party system, having people with real 
expertise in certain areas and the ability to bring in outside expertise in areas they 
don’t know—that’s essential. On the task force, it’s a combination of domain-specific 
knowledge and a commitment to long-term success. If you don’t have domain-specific 
knowledge, it’s hard to really make a contribution.  
We have unbelievable pockets of expertise across th e U.S. and the world . . . Tapping 
into that for task -force members is valuable, and folks with that expertise must be 
willing to focus on long-term success. That is . . . an essential, essential combination. 
Wilson commends the leadership—Steven Rattner, Tim Geithner, and Larry Summers—for 
setting the tone as they did; focusing on long-term success and bringing out the best in every 
member of the team was essential. “They deserve incredible credit for establishing a very 
healthy and successful culture for each of us,” he said.  
With a small team, a Herculean task, and short time span, make a plan and divide and 
conquer.  
474

--- Page 4 ---
Harry Wilson was one of four leaders of the President’s Auto Task Force working closely with 
the Department of Treasury. According to Wilson, because of their small size, planning and 
efficiency were critical in saving the auto industry: 
We were a nimble team because we were small. We had a lot of work to do . . . We 
mapped out what needed to be done and who would be able to do the work. Secondly, 
we developed a game plan and the key items we had to assess . . . President [Barack 
Obama] made the decision to move forward with the restructuring of General Motors 
and a potential sale of Chrysler, with a very short timeframe to get it done. As a result, 
we divided and conquered. I took responsibility for the General Motors restructuring 
and the suppliers. 
Wilson quickly became known for his assiduous analysis of data and facts as he led his “deals 
and diligence team” taking GM through its bankruptcy.  
In a crisis, for the experts to be most effective, you have to build trust rapidly. Being 
open and transparent, l istening to all approaches, and brainstorming will usually 
surface the best solutions.  
The sheer volume of work streams facing the Task Force in a short period of time was very  
demanding, Wilson sa id. From the beginning, it was important for the ad hoc team to 
establish a pattern of interaction that would allow them to be most effective. Wilson 
described this dynamic: 
We had a great, healthy, robust debate around [the future of Chrysler]. One of the 
great things about our team is we worked well together. We didn’t always agree, but 
we disagreed respectfully and thought through things together, collaboratively. 
Wilson further shared that his approach was to get as much out of people as possible, which 
was a challenge operating with a team that had no history. Openness and civility provided a 
framework for maximizing everyone’s contributions, said Wilson: 
In all of the negotiations, if people could articulate a better rationale, we were all ears. 
There was no pride of authorship, no sacred cows . . . If someone ’s got a better idea, 
let’s understand it, let ’s turn that way . . .  I find that approach tends to breed trust 
because it’s very transparent; you’re very clear about each of the issues. 
It allows people to feel comfortable voici ng their opinions, and aggregating things 
from the other side of the table. I ended up being a big believer in it—brainstorming, 
coming to a better solution . . . We found that transparency leads to better and more 
ideas. 
[…] You want to get as many smart people as possible who can contribute to the topic 
in the room with you and have a real exchange of ideas. It's important to have that 
framework and that process, so if you don’t feel comfortable, you can get increasingly 
comfortable with time, contributing your best ideas. 
475
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
[…] I’m biased probably because I ’ve seen it work. At this point, 27 years, I ’ve seen 
different approaches in negotiations that are exploitable —people who bluster, 
people who hold the cards close to their chests, people who just like to talk, to just 
listen. I think in a situation where you have extremely important decisions to make in 
a very short period of time with people who have not worked together previously, 
you have to build trust rapidly. The only way to do that is to be transparent and open. 
You can talk about being trustworthy, but unless people see that and believe it, they’ll 
never open up.   
Notably, Wilson emphasized that he and the Task Force used the same approach when 
negotiating with GM and its stakeholders: “There were [often] disagreements on both sides. 
If one side liked the deal, the other side didn ’t, but that never ended a deal. . . we were 
[usually] able to strike a balance that no one love[d], but [which] was the best path.” 
Pay attention to the tradeoffs when negotiating. At the end of the day, employees must 
feel valued, but  employment terms must also be competitive for the rescue and 
business to succeed.  
Wilson’s father was a bartender, and his mother was a Greek immigrant who worked in 
textile factories. His family suffered first-hand the consequences of factory closings and job 
losses when he was young. Because of this, he brought a sense of empathy to the high -level 
work of the Task Force, which included assisting GM in renegotiating its labor contracts that 
were generally thought to be out of step with its competitors and a factor in the company 
becoming less competitive. He discussed how choices were made to minimize job losses but 
still position the company for success: 
You want to have a wo rk force that is valued, but you also want them to be 
competitive relative to the company ’s direct peers. That ’s a balance, and when we 
ended, wages were competitive, benefits were less generous.  
[...] Had there been more aggressive reductions made, would  they have passed in a 
ratified labor agreement? Probably not . . . Part of the reason General Motors has been 
so successful in the last 11 years [since the bankruptcy] [is] because you’ve got a 
pretty motivated workforce that’s really been investing in transforming the business 
. . . I personally have a philosophy of wanting to do the right thing for all the 
stakeholders, and sometimes there are tradeoffs, but you have to be conscious of 
those tradeoffs instead of just imposing an onerous labor agreement o r whatever it 
is.  
It may be enticing to r eplace corporate executives and board members in failed 
companies, but many details should be considered before deciding to do so including 
when the government’s role should end.  
According to Wilson, l eadership at  GM and Chrysler had allowed their companies to fail 
under their watch, which is why the Task Force replaced them. But, he said, they were very 
476
Lessons Learned: Harry Wilson Lynch

--- Page 6 ---
deliberative in making those decisions and considered just what the role of the government 
should be in supporting the company: 
It was a tough issue we had to wrestle with. Fritz [Henderson] was the obvious 
successor internally (at GM), and the real debate became between Fritz and someone 
external. There was a little bit of cost -benefit analysis, and we all thought Fritz was 
solid, and the person who ’d be able to transport General Motors  [to success] , no 
question . . . The chance that GM gets someone [external] who’s a real superstar, who’s 
up to this task was very low.  
[…] We believed strongly that good cor porate governance is an essential ingredient 
for long -term success and good decision -making and checks and balances in the 
corporation. It became very clear there needed to be substantial change in the board 
and senior management. Then the question becomes, is that enough, or is there a need 
to do more? We had a great series of discussions around that. I was concerned that 
would not be enough ; that GM, once it was through bankruptcy, even with these 
changes, that the cultural problems that had been signific ant and ongoing, would 
become even more significant without a push to be successful. . . But Larry Summers 
was of the view that if we do that, we are going to be overstepping our authority. Even 
though it’s taxpayers’ money . . . there ’s a limit to what we  should do. We should set 
the company up to succeed, but not be involved post -closing. Whether I agree with 
that or not, as we talked it through, I came to that same view. Larry was very 
thoughtful . . . If we were more engaged post -closing, that would mak e it mostly 
political.  
Structuring the financial side of positioning the company for success requires 
considering the practicalities that exist , how much taxpayers’ money has to be 
invested, and a plan for recovering that investment. Keep politics out of it. 
Wilson discussed how the Task Force “spent a lot of time to ensure the company would not 
need to restructure a second time . . . We wanted the company to succeed in the long -term.” 
A significant issue was deciding how much capital the “New GM” that would emerge from the 
bankruptcy would need, which was particularly challenging because of GM’s poor cash 
controls. This, said Wilson, led Treasury to “out of necessity and concern, put in a little bit 
more capital than we thought might be necessary.” 
Another major challenge, said Wilson, was deciding how to structure that funding: 
Even if the company could get back to where it was, it still had too much debt to be 
able to best innovate, grow, attract talent, et cetera. I thought [starting the new 
company with a huge debt load] defeated the whole purpose of what we were trying 
to do, which means, not only avert a humanitarian crisis, but also set these companies 
up to succeed.  
Wilson explained that in a purely private-sector deal, “you would never put $50 billion in 
General Motors.” But he concluded that a government equity investment would be the best 
477
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
solution. “This was an anathema to some people who think about governance and supports 
and loans,” he described, “but the whole purpose was, how do we help the company succeed.” 
With the government’s equity investment, GM had a much hea lthier capital structure  and 
much less financial risk going forward, Wilson explained. 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: April 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-33 
478
Lessons Learned: Harry Wilson Lynch