--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Susan McLaughlin Lessons Learned: Susan McLaughlin 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Susan McLaughlin," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 
3, 205-208. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1428 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/10 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/10

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Susan McLaughlin 
By Matthew A. Lieber 
A veteran staff member of the Federal Reserve Bank  of New York (FRBNY), Susan McLaughlin 
served as head of the discount window and chief operating officer of the FRBNY’s Markets Trad-
ing Desk during the Global Financial Crisis. She was centrally involved in the Fed’s policy re-
sponse to the disruptions to secured and unsecured funding markets during 2007 –2008. Fol-
lowing the crisis, McLaughlin coordinated an effective Fed initiative to reform the triparty re-
purchase agreement ( repo) market’s settlement infrastructure. The Fed’s reform efforts, e n-
gaging the financial industry under FRBNY president Bill Dudley, were instrumental in improv-
ing the stability of the funding market. This Lesson Learned is based on an interview conducted 
with McLaughlin on December 2, 2020; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
An effective crisis response demands on-the-job learning. 
As head of the discount window in 2007, McLaughlin played a key role in the implementation 
of the Fed’s response to crisis events. “My experience during the Global Financial Crisis was 
one of continual learning about global funding markets. I think many of my colleagues would 
say the same thing,” McLaughlin said. For example, she explained that she and many of her 
colleagues were surprised in August 2007:  
We had [not] caught up with the reality that so much of dollar funding activity was 
actually happening offshore, and that so much of  the dollar credit creation, particu-
larly in spaces like structured products, was happening through foreign banking or-
ganizations as well as through domestic institutions. 
Foreign bank branches in the United States “were upstreaming dollars to their parents,” she 
said, while their head offices and regulators did not appreciate the risks they were taking. 
She and her staff adjusted their response to account for this new information. 
In total, the financial crisis and the policy response that it spurred at the Fed wrought a trans-
formation of the US central bank. The New York Fed and its agents identified flaws in whole-
sale lending markets and, after putting out a series of fires, restructured repo markets along 
more stable lines.   
During a crisis, it is impossible to know in real time when things will get better or how 
things will unfold; solutions must be flexible. 
Between 2007 and 2008, McLaughlin’s group launched emergency programs to stave off li-
quidity hoarding, prop up the largest security dealers, and expand the forms of collateral the 
Fed would accept. “Every month,” she said, “it seemed like some different segment of the 
financial markets was coming under stress.” 
205

--- Page 4 ---
In August 2007, with fears of subprime exposure swirling, the largest banks were hoarding 
liquidity and avoiding the discount window in hopes of projecting stability. Recognizing the 
perceived stigma associated with discount window credit, the Fed designed the Term Auc-
tion Facility (TAF). It was the first big program that the Fed set up to respond to the stressed 
conditions in US dollar funding markets. McLaughlin noted, however, that the TAF  
was not technically an emergency lending facility; it was actually done under normal 
discount window authority. But it helped to alleviate stress . . . It was kind of a hybrid 
of an open market operation and a lender-of-last-resort loan—we were auctioning off 
discount window funding to banks in much the same way as we auction triparty repo 
funding to primary dealers in our monetary policy operations. 
Risk aversion spread to triparty repo markets, which had taken on unprecedented scale. By 
2007, broker-dealers accessed multiple trillions of dollars of funding via triparty repo each 
day, largely from money market funds. The settlement process was designed for dealer con-
venience; there was a 10 -hour period each day between when those repos unwound and 
repos for the next day would settle. During this period, the clearing banks became lender as 
well as clearing agent. “It was not a good design,” McLaughlin explained . The clearing bank 
was “not a pure agent―they were also a creditor. Those interests conflicted.” 
The design flaw in triparty repo became a factor when Bear Stearns began to falter. McLaugh-
lin said: 
In March 2008, there was a situation where the firm’s clearing bank called up the New 
York Fed and said they weren’t going to unwind the repo with Bear Stearns unle ss 
they had some assurance that they wouldn’t be stuck with the collateral. If the clear-
ing bank had not unwound that repo, it would have pushed the dealer into default and 
prompted a run on the market that could in turn have led to other dealer defaults and 
transmitted stress beyond the repo market. 
To prevent such a result, the Fed innovated, it made a nonrecourse loan to the clearing bank, 
then formulated a backstop. “Over that weekend, literally in 48 hours,” McLaughlin recalled, 
“a group of us at the New York Fed put together the Primary Dealer Credit Facility  [PDCF], 
to provide a backstop to triparty repo borrowers .” She recalled that her team worked “ all 
day and all night throughout the weekend to get it done in time to announce . . . before Asia 
trading opened.” 
Launching the PDCF was a major step  that fortunately, prevented a run. But it also made 
clear that the Fed was operating in unknown territory. For example, t he Fed had concerns, 
McLaughlin said, about moral hazard and about the unknown qu antities that were the pri-
mary dealers. Normally, at the discount window the Fed was lending to banks that it knew, 
because they are subject to a well-established supervisory program  and prudential over-
sight. By contrast, the dealers had not been subject to prudential supervision.  
  
206
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
After the crisis , the focus should turn to addressing the problematic areas that have 
been revealed.  
“Based on the crisis experience,” McLaughlin explained, the New York Fed staff identified 
three concerns with the triparty repo market that they wanted to address:  
(1) dealers’ excessive reliance on intraday credit from the clearing banks  
(2) very poor liquidity and risk practices by lenders  
(3) the risk of fire sales of risky assets  
The Bear Stearns case had shown the Fed the flawed supposition of repo market participants 
that “dealers and lenders just assumed that the clearing bank would always be there to pro-
vide intraday credit,” McLaughlin said. 
The PDCF experience showed the Fed the depth and extent of poor credit standards  at a 
number of the dealers.  The New York Fed sent supervisory teams into each of the largest 
primary dealers to evaluate the dealers’ practices for valuing collateral. She noted: 
We had to pull all these data s ources together to validate, and we discovered that 
there were securities that were being pledged by dealers who had created structured 
products backed by their own obligations, which presents wrong -way risk to us as 
the lender. 
McLaughlin described how, after the crisis, the New York Fed collaborated with the largest 
firms in the market to develop and implement recommendations for reform. They were able 
to successfully address the first two of the three problem areas. Today, the triparty rep o 
market is sub stantially tighter, as a result of the measures taken and other changes in the 
financial industry, she said: 
When I first joined the New York Fed, people used to talk about the three legs of the 
stool: banking supervision, payment systems oversight, and mo netary policy imple-
mentation. The Global Financial Crisis brought home to many of us that it’s a chair, 
not a stool. Because financial stability is at the core of all of the aspects of our mission, 
the Fed has a strong institutional commitment to financial stability. There’s a financial 
stability division at the Board now, and they put out a public financial stability report. 
There is a financial stability element to many of the groups in the New York Bank and 
in the other Reserve Banks as well. 
Going big in a crisis response is good. 
Going big with your policy response up front is helpful in a crisis. “It’s a way to create confi-
dence,” McLaughlin explained, noting that “the announcement of action can by itself create 
confidence.” 
207
Lessons Learned: Susan McLaughlin Lieber

--- Page 6 ---
The Fed internalized this lesson from 2007–2008, McLaughlin said, citing its response to the 
COVID-19 crisis of March 2020. Usage of some of the Fed’s programs in 2020 was lower than 
anticipated, she noted. This might be an indication of those programs’ success, she said, since 
“the announcements of the programs calmed markets and created confidence.” 
Dated: September 2022  
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-29 
Copyright © Yale University. 
208
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3