--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Ron Bloom Lessons Learned: Ron Bloom 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lynch, Mary Anne Chute (2022) "Lessons Learned: Ron Bloom," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 
442-446. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1276 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/20 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/20

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Ron Bloom 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Ron Bloom served as senior adviser to Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner on President 
Barack Obama’s Task Force on the Automotive Industry and as assistant to the president for 
manufacturing policy (2009 –2011). As senior adviser on the Auto Task Force team, Bloom 
helped lead the restructuring of General Motors and Chrysler LLC. Subsequently, he advised the 
Obama administration with policy development and strategic planning to revitalize the 
manufacturing sector.  Bloom brought to Treasury his unique experience working with  
organized labor (including  the United Steelworkers Union, United Auto Workers , the 
Teamsters, the Air Line Pilots Association ), and  in the investment industry, including as a 
founding partner of the Keilin and Bloom investment banking firm. Bloom was highly regarded 
for his unparalleled negotiation skills . He left Treasury in September 2012 and is currently 
managing partner and vice chair in Brookfield’s private equity group. 
Execute evenhandedly or you eliminate the government's credibility as a good 
regulator.  
The government cannot show favoritism toward any company or industry, Bloom cautioned.  
It's absolutely vital that the government not be seen to be leaning in favor of one 
company or another. If it does, that completely eliminates the government's ability to 
be a good regulator. 
There is no question that the car problems were in the making and dated back for 
many, many years. They had been asleep at the switch. General Motors had lost 
market share literally every year for 30 or 40 years  . . . I believe the government 
should be loath to inject itself i n those situations, except for an extraordinary 
circumstance . . . If a company of General Motors' or Chrysler's size and scale had 
failed in a healthy economy, they would have been able to be reorganized . . . 
Companies fail all the time.   
 The dilemma we faced with GM and Chrysler is the financial system itself had 
basically frozen. There was no credit available . . . If the government had not been 
prepared to provide them with debtor -in-possession [DIP] financing . . . there's no 
doubt in my mind they would have liquidated . . . These companies sit at the top of the 
manufacturing industry pyramid. There are literally millions of jobs that are directly 
or indirectly tied to General Motors and to Chrysler.  The argument for saving these 
auto manufacturers is essentially not about saving them; it's about saving the 
industry.  
 That's the essential definition of systemically significant—you can't put this Humpty 
Dumpty back together again when the economy is in freefall . . . There was a lot of talk 
442

--- Page 4 ---
about it being a moral hazard , but the moral hazard argument falls apart when  the 
failure of the company matters not just to its shareholders, workers, and retirees, but 
literally to the entire industry. We weren't saving companies, we were saving the 
industry.  
Be minimally invasive.  
The members of the Auto Task Force debated the proper level o f government intervention 
throughout the negotiations, Bloom said. 
In GM's case, it was a more complicated problem . . . There was great hesitancy to take 
over the management of GM . . . to intervene more than we needed to. I think this was 
shared throughout the administration .  The watchword was “minimally invasive 
surgery.”  
The decision was, we will name new directors  . . . people whom the government 
chooses to sit on the board of directors to direct the affairs of the company . . . We 
named a very successful and , we thought, tough -minded, good businessman to be 
chair of the board. 
The change at Chrysler was more thoroughgoing because you had Fiat coming in from 
the outside, and . . .  Chrysler was within an inch of extinction  . . . Everybody knew 
that.Most people at GM figured we’d save them . . . The cultural change at GM did take 
longer to execute and was more difficult to execute  . . . it  was a more challenging 
problem.    
Bankruptcy is a combination of law and power. It’s an “adults-only game”. 
Bankruptcy is a well-develop regime for resolving companies that get into trouble. However, 
although it has a well-established body of law, creditors can wield influence throughout the 
process depending on their unique leverage. As Bloom discussed, understandably, each tried 
to improve its own position. 
Bankruptcy is a combination of law and politics. By politics, I mean power. Creditors 
get their way because they have the leverage to ge t their way. It's, as they say it, an 
“adults-only game. ” Everyone is out for themselves, which is fine, but if you have 
leverage, you use it.  
 It’s hard to make cars without workers. Anyone who thinks you could have replaced 
100,000 UAW members to go make cars in GM factories and Chrysler factories hasn't 
lived in the real world. It can't be done . . . .  The UAW used its leverage  . . . They took 
concessions. They turned their claims largely into equity, so if the company did 
poorly, those claims would  not have been honored. They did take significant 
concessions, but they used their leverage to protect the wages of the existing 
workforce—absolutely. There's nothing special about that  . . . T he suppliers to 
General Motors—in a typical bankruptcy, they're unsecured creditors . . . they take a 
443
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
big haircut . . . I n GM’s case . . . the suppliers got 100 cents on the dollar ! . . . .  UAW 
didn't get 100 cents.  
Our judgment was that if . . . we drive them [suppliers] out of business, there would 
be no steering wheels and there would be no cars. We made a hard-headed, business 
evaluation of the relative leverage and importance of various creditor classes, and we 
acted accordingly. Nobody ever criticized . . .  paying the suppliers in cash, in full  . . .  
But everybody criticizes the fact that the UAW workers didn’t take a pay cut . . . Those 
people do not understand how bankruptcy functions and . . .  the facts we were facing. 
To be a successful negotiator, be yourself.  Look for a common human bond. People 
will likely respond better if you treat them with dignity than if you don’t.  
The government carries with it enormous weight and authority. In many respects, 
government officials were more involved in more negotiations connected to the auto 
rescue—with company officials, creditors, unions, suppliers, and dealers’ representatives— 
than they were with respect to assisting financial companies. Bloom shared some reflections 
on how those negotiations were effective and successful. 
There's not one way to negotiat e. My advice . . . is you have to be yourself. Whatever 
your traits are as a person, you have to use them as a negotiator, because if you put 
on a special uniform for negotiating  . . . trying to be tough, it doesn ’t work because 
eventually your real person ality comes through.  The purpose of negotiations is 
communication. If you’re not authentic, this is really hard to do.  
I try to see the humor in difficult situations. I believe, no matter how serious things 
are, you're better off if you can be civil and you can try to look for a common bond of 
humanity with people. That's me as a person in my life. That’s the way I try to 
negotiate.  
I love problems and puzzles , f inding an answer where everybody gets something . 
Even when you can, you don’t crush the other guy . . . That is particularly true in labor 
relations. You can be a transactional negotiator, or you can be a relational negotiator. 
A transactional negotiator views every negotiation as a fight to the death. Everything 
I win comes from you, and everything you win comes from me. It’s zero sum.  
A relational negotiator understands that there ’s tomorrow, and there ’s next mon th, 
and there’s next year, and people remember when they are treated with dignity, and 
they remember when they're treated very badly. To the extent I've had any success. . 
. it’s because I try to be authentic to who I am, and I try to remember . . . those simple 
rules. That doesn’t mean it's the only way to negotiate. There are super successful 
negotiators who have completely different styles. But I can only do it in the way that 
works for me.  
444
Lessons Learned: Ron Bloom Lynch

--- Page 6 ---
The president needs moral courage to make unpopular decisions. 
In a crisis there are always very difficult decisions to be made. Bloom praised President 
Obama for setting a leadership tone that permitted his team to make decisions that could 
result in the best outcomes for the country: 
There was a great sense of . . .  trying to do the right thing. At the higher levels up to 
and including the president [Obama], there was a lot of political courage. When the 
president agreed to do this, it was not popular. . . It does take political courage.  
Bloom also commented o n the recent landscape and how the COVID -19 situation differed 
from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). 
The language we find it very hard to speak in America is the language of the general 
good because we are all in our tribes. President [Joe] Biden’s job may be even harder 
than President Obama’s because in the case of a Great Recession, you could argue that 
there were villains in it, and people understood how we got there. 
In the case of the pandemic, there's no villain . . . Yet, it’s become a political discussion 
. . . how can you politicize the question of whether or not I have the right to go 
unvaccinated and hurt you? It's mind boggling to me that we've entered this era 
where the most obvious common sense has become a political decision as to whether 
you're for or against the former president [Donald Trump].  
I think President Biden’s challenge, in some ways, is much greater now. In other ways, 
there is a great desire on the American people ’s part to fix big problems, more than 
there was during Obama’s presidency. But that ability to speak in the language of the 
general good and have patience to believe that over time you'll win people over, that's 
what Biden has to try to do . . .  
I try really hard  not to demonize those I disagree with . . . I do try to listen to what 
people I disagree with say when they have concerns. I think it's incumbent on the 
president—and this is what his political genius is —to not demonize the other side 
and not make everything a political war . . . If he succeeds, I think it will be because he 
is what he is . . .  He has a way he thinks he ought to do things , and he's true to it. His 
voice, what I think is attractive about him, is he ’s so bloody authentic  . . . There’s no 
airs. He wears his heart on his sleeve. And I think it's a good thing.  
The bias in a crisis should be toward doing more, not less. Government must keep the 
infrastructure working even when there’s no crisis. 
Bloom reflected on an important point that is som etimes overlooked—after the fire of the 
crisis is doused, the economy may still smolder, and negative effects can linger unless 
addressed. Focusing on these after-effects can be just as important for recovery as focusing 
on the intense period of a crisis explained Bloom. What government does in this period sets 
the stage for the economy and the private sector to recover. 
445
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
In the Great Recession, the size of the stimulus package was, in retrospect, too small, 
and it is one of the reasons why the recovery was as slow as it was . . . The bias should 
be toward doing more, not less . . . That’s a lesson that's being learned today in dealing 
with the pandemi c . . . I don ’t mean to trivialize a trillion dollars, but in the grand 
scheme of the American economy and all the people hurt by the pandemic, spending 
an extra trillion dollars is , honestly, chump change. We have a $20 trillion economy 
that came to a halt.  
The underinvestment in public health infrastructure  . . . [and] government playing a 
responsible role as an honest broker in terms of keeping the system working —it’s a 
good lesson. I think the president [Biden] is doing the right thing. He’s dealing with 
the current situation extremely aggressively, and he ’s using the occasion to have us 
rethink how the government can play a role in building up infrastructure of all sorts.  
 The role of government is to provide a fertile field on which people can find their way 
and be successful. But you have to till the ground . . . till the field . . . lay the irrigation 
pipes . . . prepare the ground for it. We have so underinvested in everything, from 
roads and bridges to R&D sp ending, to education, to childcare , you name it  . . . The 
goal of government is to allow people to be productive and then let the private sector 
do its job. 
When a crisis occurs, be aggressive and swift, but don’t be reckless. Be honest and fair.    
Bloom shared his top-level guidance on how government should approach a crisis, of any 
type:    
Make haste carefully. Your bias should be toward action . . . toward being aggressive, 
but you don ’t want to be reckless. Tell the truth. Be transparent. I think people are 
always better if you ’re open with them. Don't assume you know everything. Be 
humble . . . Do what’s right . . . things generally come out better if you do what you 
honestly think is right.  
The question is not, “Did you get it perfectly right in hindsight?” Because right—that's 
really tricky . . . The test is, “At the time, did you make a reasonable decision? ” . . . I 
think we made a series of reasonable decisions . . . We rescued these two companies 
and saved millions of jobs, and they were given another chance . . .  
What is government there for? What’s the purpose of it? It's to stabilize the economy 
in a gigantic crisis. We're not a bank. We ’re not there trying to make money. What ’s 
our return on investment when we vaccinate people? We keep pe ople healthy. They 
don’t die. 
Dated: April 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2021-10   
446
Lessons Learned: Ron Bloom Lynch