--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Nathan Sheets Lessons Learned: Nathan Sheets 
Yasemin Sim Esmen 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Sim Esmen, Yasemin and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Nathan Sheets," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 219-221. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1432 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/14 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/14

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Nathan Sheets 
By Yasemin Esmen and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Between 2007 and 2011, Nathan Sheets was director of the Division of International Finance 
at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. He oversaw the operations of the 
division and advised the Federal Open Market Committee  (FOMC) on economic and financial 
developments in foreign countries. Sheets also regularly represented the Federal Reserve Board 
at international meetings and in its contac ts with foreign central banks. Under his helm, the 
division was involved in helping establish and manage the US dollar liquidity swap lines with 
foreign central banks.  This Lessons Learned abstract is based on an interview with Sheets on 
December 11, 2019; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
The world’s financial system is interconnected. Strong collaboration among US 
institutions, foreign central banks, and international organizations is key to managing 
a crisis.  
The crisis began in the US financial system, and its effects slowly migrated to other countries, 
but at first it was viewed as a US problem . Sheets recalled: “When the crisis first erupted, 
particularly in Europe, it was viewed as a US crisis with some spillovers into the European 
markets.” However, in late 2007, he pointed out, building tensions, spikes in the Libor -OIS 
spread, and volatility in the fed funds rate were clear signs that the effects had already spread 
widely, and that global financial market s were desperate for US dollar liquidity. The swap 
lines and some other tools were necessary to get funds where they were most needed.  
At first, Sheets recalled, the European Central Bank (ECB) adopted a laid-back position with 
respect to the swap line (the first the Fed implemented)—“Originally, the European Central 
Bank wanted the swap lines structured in a way that made it seem like the ECB was only 
passively acting as an agent for the Federal Reserve in Europe.”  However, after the Lehman 
Brothers bankruptcy in September 2008 , there was no question that the impact would be 
widespread. There were “enormous global spillovers, [and] there was a broader realization 
that there would be adverse spillovers to other parts of the world, and that other parts of the 
world had similar kinds of underlying problems in their financial system.” 
At that point, Sheets explained, “the ECB really became a partner with th e Federal Reserve 
in fighting the crisis ,” and, in general, the cooperation between the major economies 
increased:   
It was a little bit uneven and it was a little bit choppy in terms of the global ownership 
of the crisis and, to some extent, even the glob al coordination during that first year. 
However, once you hit that Lehman inflection point, all central banks were 100% in 
and full partners in fighting the crisis. It was a realization that, yes, maybe there were 
certain US-oriented features to this, but it was transmitting and escalating around the 
world because regulatory policies in essentially all of the major economies, at least in 
advanced economy jurisdictions, had fallen short. 
219

--- Page 4 ---
Sheets spoke highly of the extraordinary steps taken by the major countries; the multifaceted 
coordinated actions eventually stemmed the tide:  
From the swap lines that were introduced in December of 2007 all the way through 
to the uncapping of swap lines ,1 from the associated policies that were put in place 
after the Lehman collapse, to the G-7 declaration, where the G7 countries essentially 
jointly guaranteed the liabilities of their banking systems, which was an 
extraordinary intervention, none of these interventions had an immediate conclusive 
effect on the stresses that were being felt and that characterized the financial crisis. 
However, all of those things put together laid the foundation for an improvement of 
conditions which we finally saw in the first half of 2009. . . 
According to Sheets, the swaps and other acti ons were well received by the markets : “The 
market seemed in particular to take heart from the message that the major central banks 
were aware of the challenges and were working closely together to address the stresses. That 
was received and was appreciated by market participants.”  
The structure and price of central bank swap lines can protect the lending central 
bank and mitigate against moral hazard while effectively providing its currency  to 
financial institutios in other countries.  
Sheets recalled that, although the Fed had taken some early steps  in 2007 to ease funding 
conditions and increase liquidity, “ it was not clear that this liquidity was getting to the 
European institutions that were hungry for it as directly as it might.”  Building tensions ; 
spikes in the Libor-OIS spread, which was an indication of tightness in funding markets; and 
volatility in the fed funds rate were clear signs that the global financial market was desperate 
for liquidity, and this led to consideration of the swap lines. 
Sheets noted that there was robust discussion in FOMC meetings about the need for the swap 
lines, whether they would encourage moral hazard , and their risk to the Fed . The FOMC 
concerns regarding risk and moral hazard were addressed in the structure and price of the 
lines. The Fed lent to the central bank, not to individual banks in the foreign jurisdiction , 
explained Sheets: The foreign central bank would then use “its regulatory, supervisory, and 
other tools to evaluate the credit worthiness of the institutions [in its jurisdiction] that were 
applying [for loans].” According to Sheets, this structure allowed the Fed to rely on th e 
foreign central banks and their knowledge of their domestic banks while limiting its risk. The 
Fed was not a party to the loan to the domestic commercial banks, Sheets noted:  
 
1 In total, during the crisis, the Fed established swap agreements with 14 countries of various sizes. Shortly 
after the Lehman Brothers, the Fed uncapped its swap lines with five major central banks: the Bank of Canada, 
the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the ECB, and the Swiss National Bank, committing to provide any 
amount of US dollars that the central banks requested , secured by an equivalent amount of their domestic 
currency. The swap lines were the most heavily used of all the Fed’s crisis facilities and reached a peak 
outstanding amount in October 2008 of more than $580 billion. A Bank for International Settlements  study 
considered the Fed swap lines to be “ very effective in relieving US dollar liquidity stresses and stresses  in 
foreign exchange markets.” Central bank co-operation and international liquidity in the financial crisis of 2008 –
9 (BIS: May 2010). https://www.bis.org/publ/work310.pdf 
220
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
That feature of the structure of the lines was also seen, very importantly, as protecting 
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, because the Federal Reserve had exposure to a 
major foreign central bank, not to any individual institution. If, indeed, some 
institution had failed, the foreign central bank would have had an exposure to de al 
with, but that foreign central bank would still have been responsible for unwinding 
the swap with the Federal Reserve. 
Another important factor of concern to the FOMC was moral hazard, which was addressed 
through the pricing, Sheets said: 
The moral hazard concerns were partially attenuated by the pricing of the liquidity. 
It was priced above what the liquidity would have cost during normal times , and 
indeed, as the crisis ended, the rate on the swap line was reduced. So, there was 
pricing to help with the moral hazard. 
The combination of these features, explained Sheets, helped protect the Fed  and prompted 
appropriate, but not abusive, use of the lines. 
We need to learn the lessons from the last crisis to be better equipped to deal with the 
next one.  
Sheets identified several lessons that he viewed as critical for making sure that the world’s 
regulators are prepared for the next crisis.   
First: Be more curious  in an aggressive and thorough manner. Dig deeper than usual. “We 
must ask what is going on and why, what the underlying drivers are , and not just assume 
that the markets are allocating optimally.” 
Second: Strengthen regulation. We need to ma ke sure banks are sufficiently capitalized  to 
maintain a strong regulatory system. And “ as we strengthen regulation, [we need] to also 
make sure that the support for regulation does not get meaningfully watered down―because 
that tends to be a bit like a swinging pendulum over time.” 
Third: Develop a familiarity with history, an awareness of what went wrong during the crisis 
and of how we addressed it.  Almost inevitably, shocks are going to happen. “It is really  
important that the next round of policymaker s be aware of, and conversant with, what we 
did and why, and where they think we got it right and where they think we could have done 
better.” 
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2019-55 
Copyright © Yale University. 
 
221
Lessons Learned: Nathan Sheets Sim Esmen and Wiggins