--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 4 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Gaurav Vasisht Lessons Learned: Gaurav Vasisht 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2022) "Lessons Learned: Gaurav Vasisht," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 4, 
646-648. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1475 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/39 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss4/39

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
Gaurav Vasisht 
By Sandra Ward 
Gaurav Vasisht served as assistant counsel, banking and financial services, to the governor of 
New York during the Global Financial Crisis of 2007 –2009 (GFC). In his role, Vasisht set the 
governor’s agenda for banking and financial policy and oversaw the regulatory and legislative 
priorities of the state banking and insurance departments. Vasisht played a pivotal role in 
developing and drafting consume r protection legislation, particularly as it related to housing 
foreclosures at the time of the crisis. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview with Vasisht 
that occurred on September 27, 2019; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
We must pay attention to possible long -term outcomes before committing to 
prolonged deregulatory efforts.  
As an aide for banking and financial services to New York Governor David Patterson, Vasisht 
witnessed the economic havoc caused by the GFC at the state level, much of which occurred 
against a backdrop of financial deregulation that had been occurring over the course of a 
decade. He recalls, 
I saw first hand how a crisis can devastate families and households and 
neighborhoods. It also gave me an appreciation for how important it is to pay 
attention to the deregulatory agenda. It is very technical, it is very complicated, and it 
can impact people in profound ways.  
Vasisht notes the huge loss of household wealth, the increase in neighborhood blight, the rise 
in so -called “zombie” properties (those that had been foreclosed on and for which the 
ownership was uncertain), shuttered businesses, and vandalism that occurred as a result of 
the GFC.  
Compounding matters, the heightened level of economic uncertainty created by the GFC led 
to a fiscal crisis for New York  because tax receipts of all t ypes—sales tax, personal income 
tax, and corporate tax revenues—fell dramatically, which impacted many essential services, 
including education, transportation, and housing. Vasisht recalls, 
For example, state personal income tax revenue projections fell by  around 50% or 
more during the most acute phase of the crisis. That created a multi -year, multi -
billion-dollar deficit in the state budget and a fiscal crisis as the state's general fund 
was eventually depleted of money. That sparked a whole host of issues  and 
considerations of difficult policies, including raising taxes and fees, increasing tuition 
at public universities, imposing crippling budget cuts at state agencies, cutting school 
tax rebates, delaying payments to local government, and so on. We even considered 
furloughing employees and issuing IOUs instead of tax refunds.  
 
646

--- Page 4 ---
Financial deregulation and its effects can be difficult to track because it often occurs in bits 
and pieces at the margins , and so the overall consequences may not be apparent init ially.  
However, said Vasisht, “as a package, [deregulation] really does have a negative impact on 
the resilience of the stability of the financial system.” 
More work needs to be done  to ensure that banks and the financial system have 
greater resilience.  
In the wake of the GFC, steps were taken to boost the resiliency of banks, including requiring 
higher levels of capital and liquidity, says Vasisht.  Stress tests were implemented to evaluate 
banks’ ability to withstand a crisis as severe as the GFC or worse. Vasisht maintains, however, 
that more work needs to be done to ensure that global systemically important banks and 
counterparty problems can be resolved without causing chaos in the financial markets  or 
relying on bailouts funded by taxpayers. Nonetheless, he argues, once the economy 
rebounded, the focus shifted to easing regulatory burdens. He says, 
Countercyclical policies would suggest that we should be building up capital first , 
finalizing the liquidi ty rules, and making sure that our stress -testing framework is 
robust. We can continue to do the work to make stress testing more realistic, 
including taking into account the boomerang effects and the second-order effects. But 
we seem to be doing the oppos ite: loosening the supplementary leverage ratio , 
pulling back on the liquidity rules, and reducing the strength and frequency of stress 
testing.  
Instead of becoming lax during quiet times, Vasisht suggests that regulators stay diligent and 
continue to str engthen regulatory requirements and supervision. He also would focus on 
nonbank areas such as broker-dealers, hedge funds, and money market funds. He would also 
look at the clearing entities. After the Dodd-Frank Act, he says, many derivatives must be 
centrally cleared, which “makes the system safer overall, but has concentrated a lot of risk in 
the central counterparties. ” The clearing entities are systemically important, says Vasisht, 
but “we have systemically important institutions that don ’t have an appropriate regulatory 
framework yet.” He also points out that although the FDIC likely has resolution authority 
over these entities, the FDIC is not their regulator and is not involved with them on a day-to-
day basis, raising questions of how successful a resolution would be. These are the areas on 
which he would like to see continued focus. 
Supervision can be a powerful crisis-planning tool, but it must be robust and effective.  
One area that tends to get overlooked in the financial system, especially amid a  crisis, is 
supervision and enforcement, says Vasisht. It’s a hugely important role that tends to take a 
backseat to regula tory requirements, but it can have a tremendous impact on a bank’s 
resiliency, internal controls, and practices which can strengthen it for a crisis. The nature of 
supervision demands confidentiality because of concerns about bank runs, he says. Yet , for 
supervision to play a meaningful role, it must be robust and effective; it requires more 
attention. Says Vasisht, 
647
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
It's not enough to come up with the rules of the road, which is what regulation is. You 
have to make sure those regulations are being implemented the right way and that 
supervisors are doing what they need to do effectively. . . . 
The job of the supervis or is very difficult. Because of the opaque nature of 
supervision, because we’re concerned about bank runs historically, supervision tends 
to be confidential. That ’s where people can have a further impact on resilience and 
risk management. 
I’ve found that bank examiners, because of the complexity of their job and because of 
the reliance that they have on the institutions themselves, may not be as forceful as 
they could be to ensure the safety and soundness of particularly large complex 
financial institutions. That is an area that needs to be looked at much more carefully. 
. . . and I think that if we do that , we will make inroads to being sure that banks are 
better managed from a risk perspective and that we have a better handle on their 
activity. 
 
Date: December 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2019–27 
 
648
Lessons Learned: Gaurav Vasisht Ward