--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 3 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Kieran J. Fallon Lessons Learned: Kieran J. Fallon 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public 
Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Kieran J. Fallon," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 3, 
198-201. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1426 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss3/8 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss3/8

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability  
Lessons Learned 
 
Kieran J. Fallon 
By Matthew A. Lieber 
Presently the senior deputy general counsel for regulation and government affairs at PNC Fi-
nancial Services Group, Kieran Fallon completed a 16-year tenure in the legal division of the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 2011. As associate general counsel during 
the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) , he helped design the Federal Reserve’s Commercial Paper 
Funding Facility, restructure American International Gro up (AIG), and implement the Dodd -
Frank Act. Relatedly, Fallon also served as general counsel for the Financial Stability Oversight 
Board from 2008 to 2011. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview conducted with Fallon 
on August 13, 2020; the full transcript can be accessed here.  
Leadership matters. 
As the financial crisis began, Fallon was an accomplished lawyer in the legal division of the 
Federal Reserve. He shared a mutual respect and commitment for his fellow Fed staff and 
especially appreciated the breadth of their expertise. The wide variety of  professional per-
spectives among his colleagues—regulators, economists, regional bank officials, market sur-
veillance experts, and traders—provided for a broad vision, he said. 
In 2007, the initiatives that Fed leaders tasked to Fallon and his colleagues to ok on a new 
urgency. Moreover, the hotspots were cropping up at institutions that the Fed did not regu-
late. Mortgage originator New Century Financial collapsed in April. In June, subprime prob-
lems mounted at Bear Stearns, only to intensify in March 2008. I n September 2008, the in-
solvency of Lehman Brothers and AIG presented the Fed with the start of a global financial 
meltdown. Money market funds stopped buying commercial paper, forcing American com-
panies to finance operations overnight and threatening to freeze the whole economy.  
The Federal Reserve  enacted emergency measures to reintroduce liquidity to interbank 
funding and stabilize a system on the brink of collapse. Doing so was far from simple, as Fal-
lon explained: “We had to act to fashion a program without fiscal backing.” It took until Oc-
tober 3 for Congress to authorize Treasury’s Troubled Asset s Relief Program (TARP). Be-
cause the Federal Reserve Act says that the Fed can only lend to nonbanks in emergency 
situations if such loans are secured to the satisfaction of the Reserve Bank, any intervention 
had to be self-standing; the Fed could not lose money.  
Fallon helped the Fed design and implement the novel Commercial Paper Funding Facility 
(CPFF), structuring it to ensure that the Fed was adequately secured. The CPFF was an effec-
tive crisis response because it got liquidity through to where it was needed, while it avoided 
saddling the Fed with significant legal and financial risks, explained Fallon.  
How did US leaders stave off system collapse? Fallon pointed to “the willingness of our prin-
cipals—then Fed chairman Ben Bernanke, Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr., and Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of New York president Timothy Geithner—to make tough decisions:” 
198

--- Page 4 ---
We were blessed to have Ben B ernanke as chair of the Federal Reserve Board at the 
time—someone with the greatest knowledge of financial crises and central bank in-
tervention. Having Hank Paulson willing to advocate with Congress and the admin-
istration for unpopular decisions—for actions that would not normally have been ac-
ceptable—made a major difference. 
The leadership of Bernanke and Paulson is defined by a willingness to identify, advocate, and 
implement extraordinary measures. The results of the interventions they steered can be de-
bated. But their record shows that leadership that reacts boldly and with a willingness to 
constantly adapt can be effective.   
Constant communication and coordination within individual teams and among the top 
leaders and agencies is critical. 
The successful aspects of the US government response —exemplified in effective initiatives 
like the CPFF—owed much to the knowledge base, experience, professionalism, and flexibil-
ity of the staff team at high levels and through the ranks. Fallon called the Fed –Treasury 
group “the brightest, most dedicated people I’ve ever worked with. It was day in and day out 
for weeks and months. We had a saying then, ‘Thank God it’s Friday—only two more working 
days until Monday.’” 
The crisis response spurred leaders and staff to new levels of external outreach —working 
more seamlessly than usual with their counterparts at the Treasury, Capitol Hill, and foreign 
central banks, which the Fed believes greatly assisted the response . Notes Fallon: “In crisis 
mode we went into hyperdrive. There were regular ongoing contacts between the principals. 
Whereas in normal times the chairman of the Board of Governors will hold regular monthly 
meetings with the Treasury Secretary, they were having daily conversations during the cri-
sis.” Fallon also credited Fed Governors Don Kohn and Kevin Warsh with ensuring strong 
working relationships between Bernanke, Paulson, and Geithner. In addition, throughout the 
crisis, this trio had regular, frequent contacts with congressional leaders.  
Today’s COVID-19 situation, Fallon said, also highlights the importance of coordination, spe-
cifically, the initial Fed–Treasury–Congress efforts that enabled a robust fiscal and monetary 
policy response to the economic shock. Leaders at the Fed and in the executive and legislative 
branches used crisis policy templates from the last crisis to act as one, to pass the CARES Act, 
and to enable the Treasury to support more ample lending with a loss backstop.  
The highly fragmented nature of the US  financial regulatory system complicated the 
job of US leaders and remains a continuing source of systemic vulnerability.  
The US has one of the most fragmented financial regulatory systems  in the world , Fallon 
pointed out. There are a lot of regulatory ag encies, and there is potential for informational 
silos and blind spots. This makes the c oordination that was so key during the GFC hard to 
199
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
achieve. For example, in 2007, the Securities and Exchange Commission, not the Fed, was the 
regulator of independent investment banks such as Lehman Brothers. However, the SEC had 
no ability to provide liquidity to these entities when they became stressed. Constrained to 
be the lender of last resort for these entities of which it had only limited knowledge, the Fed 
adopted the Primary Dealer Credit Facility and began monitoring the investment banks as 
the potential lender of billions of dollars to them.  
The strenuous coordination and communication efforts across agencies that developed dur-
ing the crisis were exceptional, said Fallon, but even then, traditional barriers to information 
flow hampered decision making for Fed leaders. He stressed that in a crisis, having real-time 
actionable information is important. Efforts should be made to maintain communication 
across agencies in peace time so as to facilitate crisis-time information sharing. 
Post-crisis reforms stabilized the US financial system , albeit imperfectly, enabling a 
robust but incomplete economic response to the COVID-19 pandemic crisis. 
Overall, Fallon credited the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for 
several “salutary effects” on the financial system: (1) bank capital levels today are multiples 
of what they were before the crisis; (2) an orderly liquidation authority enabl es regulators 
to wind down a systemically important institution; (3) improvements in regulating deriva-
tives, including centralized clearing of swaps and rules governing margins ; and (4) a single 
dedicated agency, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, should im prove consumer 
protections. 
However, shadow banking, in Fallon’s view, is a continuing concern and potential source of 
vulnerability for the system. Dodd-Frank has “pushed” some activities to the nonbank area, 
Fallon said—collateralized loan obligations, private-equity funds, hedge funds, and nonbank 
mortgage originators. He cited the Fed’s 2020 action to intervene in the Treasury market in 
response to hedge fund activity as a new form of moral hazard, with the Fed intervening in 
the nonregulated hedge fund space . Regulators and market participants still do not have a 
full understanding, he feared, of the scale and scope of the nonbank markets.  
Take big actions early and convey a clear and credible plan.  
Acting early with decisiveness and the  demonstrated power of government resources can 
renew market confidence, said Fallon. If the intervention is credible to market actors—based 
on a correct diagnosis, with a clear plan and adequate resources—they may not test it at all. 
Alternatively, moving early with big actions has risks; it depends on the analysis, capabilities, 
and messaging of the policymakers. If any part is lacking, the action may not resonate in the 
minds of market actors with the force required to achieve its effect.  
Some Fed programs achieved their desired effect merely by presenting an alternative or 
backstop to frozen markets, altering behavior by restoring confidence in the flow of credit, 
200
Lessons Learned: Kieran J. Fallon Lieber

--- Page 6 ---
said Fallon. He described the early positive response to the Fed’s 2008 programs to aid the 
money market mutual funds and to jumpstart consumer spending by supporting asset -
backed securitization: “We were prepared to make more loans than we made. But there was 
an announcement effect instead that stabilized the markets.” 
Dated: September 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-03 
Copyright © Yale University. 
 
201
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 3