--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Eric Kolchinsky Lessons Learned: Eric Kolchinsky 
Steven H. Kasoff 
Yale School of Management School of Management 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kasoff, Steven H. and Lieber, Matthew A. (2022) "Lessons Learned: Eric Kolchinsky," Journal of Financial 
Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 429-434. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1273 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/17 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/17

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Eric Kolchinsky 
By Steven H. Kasoff and Matthew A. Lieber 
Eric Kolchinsky served as managing director of ratings for ABS CDOs (asset -backed security 
collateralized debt obligations) at Moody’s Investor Services from 2005 to 2007. Kolchinsky 
started his career in structured finance with stints at Goldman Sachs and  Merrill Lynch. He 
joined Moody’s in 2000 as vice president for credit. In 2007, after Kolchinsky raised questions 
concerning the ratings of new deals in light of subprime downgrades, Moody’s removed him 
from his client -facing position. Kolchinsky supervis ed methodology for structured finance 
valuations at Moody’s Analytics for two years, before Moody’s suspended him altogether in 
2009. Separated from Moody’s, Kolchinsky testified before Congress about fraudulent rating 
agency practices and conflicts of int erests. Since 2009, Kolchinsky has served at the National 
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), where he is presently director of structured 
securities and capital markets. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview with 
Kolchinsky. 
In the decade before the financial crisis, rating agencies became more profit-oriented 
while confronting more complex products than ever. 
The rating agencies played an important and widely documented role in the subprime 
securitization bubble of 2005–07 that triggered the Global Financial Crisis. Investors relied 
on the ratings to judge the risk of the securities and satisfy regulatory requirements . Eric 
Kolchinsky received a brief but intense media spotlight as an industry whistleblower in 2009 
for signaling the contradictions between rating agencies’ practices and their public role as a 
market referee. In our interview, Kolchinsky described in frank detail the practices of the 
agencies as they handled a wave of complex structured products during the boom years. 
Rating agencies serve market participants, as Kolchinsky explained in a 2011 presentation,1 
by providing a reliable estimate of a security’s likelihood of failure. Private companies, rating 
agencies originally earned revenue from investor subscriptions  but increasingly began 
earning revenues from issuer fees in the 1970s.2 
 
1 Eric Kolchinsky, “The Rating Agencies: Regulatory Perspectives,” presentation to Georgetown University Law 
School, Washington, DC, November 2, 2011. 
2 US securities law authorizes the Securities and Exchange Commission to designate nationally recognized 
statistical rating organization (NRSRO) status, qualifying an agency to rate financ ial institutions, broker -
dealers, insurance companies, and corporate issuers of securities. Federal and state regulators have relied on 
NRSRO ratings to determine minimum capital levels in their supervision of banks and other financial 
institutions. At the  direction of the 2010 Dodd -Frank Act, however, US bank regulators have adopted 
alternative standards of creditworthiness, introducing the “investment -grade” label. Institutional investors 
remain a key end -user of the NRSRO ratings. Standard & Poor’s and M oody’s have dominated the NRSROs, 
responsible for more than 80% of ratings across all asset classes in 2018.  
429

--- Page 4 ---
Using a particular statistical methodology, the agency ratings provide a reasoned assessment 
of credit risk, based on particular estimates of the probabilities of loss or default. Th e 
agencies’ ratings of all securities are, however, simply the result of a model applied to a 
particular security, controlling for other factors and with large, simplifying assumptions and 
omitted variables. 
For decades, Kolchinsky said, the agencies had o perated as private partnerships and 
functioned as a market utility, providing reliable credit analysis along professional lines. This 
model broke down in the 2000s, according to Kolchinsky, when the agencies became publicly 
held companies and when the focus of their business shifted to structured finance. 
The complexity of structured products meant that there was not a single recognized 
methodology for evaluating them, nor a clearly optimal one. The rating agencies were 
ill-equipped—and improperly motivated—to rate CDOs. 
Structured credit products challenged rating agencies, Kolchinsky said, to adapt from 
modeling the probability distribution of default for an individual company to modeling the 
aggregate default or loss distribution of a portfolio of bonds t hat have correlations among 
themselves. Specifically, characteristics of CDOs that he cited as increasing their complexity 
and opaqueness that proved challenging to the rating agencies included: 
• Securitization multiplied the number of agents separating bor rowers from risk 
bearers, as mortgages or other assets passed from originator to a residential 
mortgage-backed security (RMBS) and then to a CDO; and 
• Each agent in the chain of production was less incentivized to act in the interest of the 
risk bearer and more incentivized to act for his own short-term profit. Compensation 
for the agents shifted from a long -term object (partnership interest) to short -term 
salary and annual bonus. 
Furthermore, across the credit rating industry, there were fewer people qualified to analyze 
and rate structured products, according to Kolchinsky, than for other market segments. 
Conventional fixed -income securities, by contrast, had been scrutinized by ranks of 
professionals using methodologies developed over decades. This made CD O ratings less 
transparent, Kolchinsky said. 
The staff in Kolchinsky’s CDO group came from corporate bonds. They “lacked knowledge of 
how the underlying RMBS bonds worked,” and they did not talk with the RMBS group. They 
used the methodology they knew well. 
Faced with the challenge of the new complex products, Kolchinsky continued, the rating 
agencies employed existing models and a trial -and-error practice to determine the best 
methodologies. At first, he said, Moody’s applied its conventional corporate bon d ratings 
models and tools to analyze ABS CDOs and establish its foothold in structured finance 
products. One such model was the binomial method, an important original methodology 
used for rating collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). “The binomial was a heuristic that 
worked quite well” to generate accurate ratings on CLOs using strong assumptions, 
430
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Kolchinsky explained, but “the binomial model had zero statistical basis” when applied to 
RMBS CDOs. 
Revenue streams from the new CDO business generated a meth odological Wild West. 
The best model for a CDO, it turned out, was the one that was plausible and generated 
the most favorable rating. 
Around 2004, with subprime CDO issuance starting to take off, Kolchinsky recalled that 
Moody’s had a problem. 
The binomia l method wasn’t working very well for Moody’s. When I say it wasn’t 
working well, Moody’s was losing business. That was in the ABS [segment], so RMBS-
backed CDOs. 
This was, Kolchinsky continued, due to a crucial output that would drive the ultimate rating 
of the security, namely the diversity score that the model generated. The diversity score of a 
CDO was a measure of the independence (or noncorrelation) of the underlying securities 
from one another. More diversity meant less correlation, and this resulted in a better rating, 
since the underlying securities were less likely to default simultaneously. As Kolchinsky 
explained it, the problem for him and for the Moody’s structured finance group that he led, 
however, was the output that the binomial method was producing. 
The diversity score that came out was in the low teens. At low teens, basically you had 
a lot of cliff effects. If you have basically 12 scenarios that you’re running, because the 
diversity score was 12, you could have a lot of cliffs. And when you probability -
weighted those, you started getting much lower ratings. Especially at the top where 
you needed the AAA to finance and lower the cost of funding for the deal. 
However, Kolchinsky explained, the analytic challenges in rating a CDO opened up t he 
possibility of using different models. As that market took off and shifted into ABS CDOs and 
RMBS, Kolchinsky described a methodological Wild West across the broader market for 
credit ratings. Monte Carlo simulation models, S&P’s black box simulation mo del, a two -
moment method, and CDO -ROM were some of the methodologies being applied by the 
industry. 
It turned out, Kolchinsky said, that the Monte Carlo simulation models were generating more 
favorable ratings of subprime real estate CDOs: 
Eventually, the consideration was to take [the Monte Carlo simulation model] and to 
apply it to an area where the binomial wasn’t working well. [From then on,] we had 
tremendous market share, and we usually didn’t miss deals. 
431
Lessons Learned: Eric Kolchinsky Kasoff and Lieber

--- Page 6 ---
In the decade before the financial crisis, the rating agencies became public companies. 
The move incentivized rating agency directors to prioritize market share over sound 
methodology. 
For decades, the standard revenue model at the top three rating agencies had been issuer -
pay, meaning that the underwriter of the security paid a fee to the agency for completing and 
publishing a rating. However, important structural changes had occurred i n the industry 
during the period immediately before the crisis. Kolchinsky emphasized two changes in 
particular and described the ways that these changes influenced agency ratings of CDOs: 
• Moody’s went public in 2000, increasing its focus on revenue growth; and 
• Rating agencies shifted compensation of their staff from a long -term focus to short -
term financial incentives. 
When the CDO boom began a few years later, Kolchinsky explained, it introduced a stream 
of new business that saw more competition between the different rating agencies for profits. 
The surge in synthetic CDOs would accentuate these dynamics. 
Kolchinsky also confirmed that management at Moody’s directed ratings managers to 
prioritize market share over sound methodology. When asked if the CDO r atings 
methodology at Moody’s was designed to try to more closely match S&P and Fitch ratings at 
the time, Kolchinsky responded, “Yeah. Of course, absolutely.” Moody’s was losing business 
because it was generating ratings that were too low relative to othe r rating agencies, he 
explained. Ratings shopping—when an issuer seeks the agency with the lowest standards to 
return the highest rating —was happening, and the pressure was on Kolchinsky to pursue 
market share. 
The bottom line, Kolchinsky made clear, was that a good model for rating CDOs in this 
environment was one that generated a better rating. 
That’s how things work at rating agencies. Even if people don’t say it out loud, you’ve 
got to look at the incentives. If you don’t have the market share, you ’re going to get 
fired. 
Around this time, Kolchinsky confirmed, rating agencies had shifted compensation of their 
staff from a long -term focus to short -term financial incentives. The rating agency business 
model has very high fixed costs, Kolchinsky explai ned, but also enormously high profit 
margins once you can add business. The pressures were obvious, Kolchinsky remembered. 
If you’re not keeping the lights on and you’re a publicly traded company, you have a 
group that’s sucking down a lot of money without  generating that kind of marginal 
revenue—you’re going to get fired. Nobody has to tell you, “You have to get in 
business.” You’re looking at what you’re producing, you’re looking at your salary and 
going, “How long are they going to keep me around?” It doesn’t have to be said. 
432
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
When these profits were threatened, recalled Kolchinsky, in 2004 –07, directors at Moody’s 
pressured ratings managers to get more business. In addition, he said, they failed to adjust 
their methodologies to address mounting evidence o f large-scale losses in the real estate 
markets. They should have refused to rate products that they could not analyze. Yet, in the 
pursuit of shareholder value, the directors repeatedly emphasized market share strategies, 
Kolchinsky explained: 
These are smart people . . . And they told you what your market share was. That was 
the market share emails that I started receiving when I was managing the group. 
“Here’s your market share, here’s how you’re doing. Here are the deals you missed. 
Why did you miss tho se deals?” Nobody said directly, “Make these deals work,” but 
you knew where it was going. Managers were fired periodically. 
Before 2000, directors at Moody’s worked for a private company that did not answer to 
shareholders and that, in Kolchinsky’s opinion, was significantly less beholden to investment 
bank clients. The issuer-pay revenue model had previously coexisted with a less profit-driven, 
and more reliable, rating agency industry. According to Kolchinsky, the transformation of 
Moody’s into a more ag gressively capitalistic shareholder value–driven firm combined with 
the issuer-pay model and the new challenges of structured finance to cause management to 
chase market share and profits at the expense of their ratings and credibility. 
After the financial crisis, the rating agencies received much criticism from various reviewing 
bodies including the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC), which specifically looked at 
Moody’s. Along with plain evidence of rating agency failures,  the commission gathered 
significant evidence that confirmed Kolchinsky’s descriptions regarding the design of 
appropriate methodologies and the shift in corporate culture to a short -term revenue focus 
and their impacts on ratings. 3 The FCIC also specifically concluded that that the division 
rating CDOs at Moody’s was under-resourced. But its criticisms were not limited to Moody’s. 
“The three credit rating agencies were key enablers of the financial meltdown . . . This crisis 
could not have happened without [them]. Their ratings h elped the market soar and their 
downgrades through 2007 and 2008 wreaked havoc across markets and firms.”4 
Kolchinsky called for a quasi -public rating agency modeled after the insurance 
industry. 
Practitioners interviewed by the Yale Program on Financial Stability from a wide range of 
institutional settings have concurred in criticizing the rating agencies’ performance prior to 
and during the crisis. Like Kolchinsky, many pointed to the problematic incentives in the 
issuer-pay model, which may have influenced the use of models that delivered a majority of 
AAA ratings. It is strange that the main business of Moody’s Investor Services (italics added) 
 
3 See Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC), The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report (Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office, 2011), 146–50, 207–12. (Note: Kolchinsky provided evidence to the 
commission, which also interviewed a number of other former and then –Moody’s employees.) 
4 FCIC, xxv. 
433
Lessons Learned: Eric Kolchinsky Kasoff and Lieber

--- Page 8 ---
and other major rating agencies lies in earnings from fees for services to underwriters—who 
are not investors. 
The 2006 Credit Rating Agency Reform Act formalized US Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) oversight of the industry in an effort to ensure that only qualified firms that 
had been approved by the agency as nationally recognized statistical rating org anizations 
(NRSROs) were issuing ratings for financial instruments and entities that were being relied on 
by investors. The 2010 Dodd-Frank Act enhanced the SEC’s oversight and pushed regulators, 
which had also relied on ratings in judging a bank’s risk level, to develop alternative measures 
of creditworthiness,5 introducing the “investment-grade” label. Institutional investors remain 
a key end -user of the NRSRO ratings. Currently, nine firms are registered as NRSROs; 6 
however, Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s have dominated the industry, responsible for more 
than 80% of ratings across all asset classes in 2018. 
Rating agency reforms have been piecemeal, however, and the system remains largely similar 
to its pre-crisis state. In 2010–11, Kolchinsky actively promoted an overhaul of the system. 
Asked about rating agency reform, he explained his support for a “quasi-public rating agency 
model,” which he would base on the insurance industry, given his experience there. Kolchinsky 
explained that the National Associ ation of Insurance Commissioners is a nonprofit 
organization of state regulators funded by industry filing fees and dedicated to supporting 
regulators. The NAIC’s Securities Valuation Office oversees a hybrid system integrating at least 
three kinds of ratings by government regulators and private rating agencies: 
• In-house ratings of insurance industry products for regulators, 
• Fully outsourced ratings of industry products by private financial institution 
specialists for market participants, and 
• Contracted ratings provided by private institutions with closer oversight. 
In a public rating agency model such as this one, said Kolchinsky, ratings managers are sala-
ried employees of the NAIC. As regulators, they bring that perspective to the work and are 
not incentivized to grow the market. While moving to such a system as it relates to NRSROs 
would take significant effort, Kolchinsky also stressed that the other extreme, more compe-
tition among private agencies, is not the answer. 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: April 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-46 
 
5 SEC.gov, “Learn More About NRSROs,” a ccessed April 30, 2021, https://www.sec.gov/ocr/ocr-learn-
nrsros.html. 
6 SEC.gov, “Current NRSROs,” accessed January 11, 2022, https://www.sec.gov/ocr/ocr-current-nrsros.html. 
434
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1