--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
Lessons Learned: James Finkel Lessons Learned: James Finkel 
Steven H. Kasoff 
Yale School of Management School of Management 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kasoff, Steven H. and Lieber, Matthew A. (2022) "Lessons Learned: James Finkel," Journal of Financial 
Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 415-419. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1270 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/14 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/14

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
James Finkel 
By Steven H. Kasoff and Matthew A. Lieber 
A Wall Street veteran specializing in structured credit transactions, Jim Finkel was co -founder 
and director of the structured credit asset management firm Dynamic Credit Partners (DCP) 
from 2003 to 2009. Finkel started his career as a securities lawyer fo r the international law 
firm Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft LLP, before moving over to the banking side in 1992. He 
specialized in mortgage -backed securities and collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) for 
several firms, including Bear Stearns and Deutsche B ank, where he headed the London -based 
CLO group. In 2003, Finkel returned to New York to launch and run DCP. In 2010, he joined 
financial consulting firm Duff and Phelps, where he advises clients on dispute practices, expert 
testimony, regulatory issues, a nd liquidations. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an 
interview with Finkel. 
Into the fray: Wall Street lawyer dives deep into structured credit deal-making. 
Jim Finkel enjoys solving three -dimensional puzzles of  byzantine technical rules, complex 
organizations, and the humans who run them. He started his career in 1986 as a lawyer for 
a firm servicing Wall Street banks. The client banks were putting together early mortgage -
backed security issuances. Finkel found the details and the action of investment deal-making 
fascinating, so he moved over to the bank side for Myerberg & Company. He described the 
various facets of the credit underwriting process: “These securitizations have a lot of moving 
parts between the rating agencies, the trustees, the accountants, the lawyers, and then inside 
the bank—the structurers, the traders, the salesforce.” 
Finkel described his role as transaction manager in the investment bank—to coordinate with 
different players the production and marketing of complex structured cr edit deals. At 
Myerberg and then at Nomura, he managed a variety of projects, “providing financing to 
mortgage originators, creating warehouse facilities for their own lending activities, acquiring 
distressed portfolios of mortgages, and restructuring them  both on the residential and 
commercial side, and placing the loan pools we financed through to private -label RMBS 
[residential mortgage -backed securities] and agency CMOs [collateralized mortgage 
obligations].” At Bear Stearns and Deutsche Bank, where he later worked, he was involved 
in securitized products including perpetual bank debt, emerging market debt, and high-yield 
bonds. Ready to “take a stab at the buy side,” he joined with a longtime associate to form 
Dynamic Credit Partners, a collateralized debt obligation (CDO) management firm, in 2003. 
Finkel described the nuts and bolts of the CDO management business from his firm’s 
point of view. 
The CDO manager is purely on the buy side, Finkel said, responsible for making the 
investment decisions for the  portfolio of assets within a CDO. Dynamic Credit Partners, 
during its four years of full operations, did a total of 10 CDOs; it also ran two credit funds and 
grew to $5 billion in total assets under management. Revenues came from asset management 
415

--- Page 4 ---
fees at 20 basis points. Annual revenues were typically around $10 million, peaking at 
$13 million to $14 million, with about 30 employees and overhead of $8 million to $9 million. 
DCP invested some of its profits in one of its two proprietary funds. 
Most independent asset-backed securities (ABS) CDO managers had a similar cost structure 
and profit margin. It was more profitable to keep growing. Had DCP doubled or tripled its 
assets under management (AUM), said Finkel, “our marginal cost would have stayed about 
the same.” While start -ups and smaller CDO managers struggled to break even, once they 
achieved scale, they became extremely profitable.  
According to Finkel, DCP differentiated itself from its competitors in its measured stance: 
“We were considered to be slo wer, more analytical . . . [in contrast to] some of the other 
managers described as ‘just backing up the truck’ [who bought whatever was coming 
through the market] . . . We were in a sector which was caught up in a frenzy, but we were 
trying to hold a line on quality.” 
Pressures on CDO managers to grow AUM fast —regardless of quality —were strong, 
which meant CDOs were marketed without scrutiny and loaded up with risk. 
According to Finkel, there was pressure on the CDO managers from the dealers to buy 
whatever the dealers would produce. “The dealers saw a CDO as a vehicle to sell paper,” 
Finkel said. These Wall Street firms, he explained, were looking to unload warehouse risk on 
assets acquired during ramp-up, and they made fees on each securitization. 
One person in the market said to me, “Jim, why aren’t you doing $10 billion instead of 
$5 billion, because when it all falls apart, everybody’s going to look the same, and you 
might as well just swing for the fences now.” And we just wouldn’t do that. 
One bank, Finkel recalled, was pressuring DCP to do a CDO with securities that did not match 
its standards. “We almost canceled a CDO because we were being pressured to acquire 
collateral . . . we put the deal on ice for a few months.” The bank was trying “to shoehorn [us] 
into buying their production now.” Finkel doubted that other CDO investment managers 
stood up to such pressure. 
A second source of pressure, Finkel said, came from the finite quantity of underlying MBS 
assets available. “In pure mortgage -backed securities offerings, a deal would be announced 
on Wednesday afternoon, and if you didn’t have an order in by Friday morning, you wouldn’t 
get an allocation.” DCP developed a model that could stress test the assets in a prospective 
portfolio within 36 hours—to determine if the firm would ask for an allocation or not. Most 
firms just said yes, buying the tranches without testing them. 
In the context of the expansion of mortgage credit during the bubble years, the factor of 
limited MBS offerings may seem surprising. But it speaks to the powerful global demand for 
yield on dollar-denominated credit assets in 2005–07. 
Not only were the investment banks servicing that demand for yield very profitably, Finkel 
pointed out, they joined the rush and paid bonuses based on paper profits. 
416
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Dealers made good fees arranging RMBS and CDOs, marking up the product on the 
turn into a new securitization. But beyond that, the structurers and traders were able 
to convince their banks that they would have “riskless arbitrage” by taking the “super 
senior” tranche on balance sheet (and financing it at a much lower spread), and then 
purchasing AAA -rated bond insurance on the position. There would still be a net 
running “positive carry”—I knew a salesman who gave his boat that name!—on, say, 
$900 million of a $1 billion deal. Some people were able to convince their banks that 
the present value of that future positive carry could be included in the current year’s 
bonus pool! 
Unfortunately, the absence of risk management would soon force some of these same dealer 
firms into panic selling. 
Initially wary, European and Asian investors moved to get in the game, drawn by the 
high yields, favorable ratings, and surging volumes of subprime CDOs. 
In the years leading up to the subprime CDO boom, institutional investors in Europe and Asia 
were reluctant to dive into the new market and hesitated to buy the novel CDOs backed by 
US subprime mortgage-backed securities. 
Finkel told how DCP in fact completed a number of CDO deals with European investment 
bank groups as structurers. The European orientation built off of DCP’s personal 
relationships as well as its relatively tempered approach to the growing exuberance of US 
markets. In these CDOs, the dealer firm, such as Dresdner Bank and Calyon (of France’s 
Crédit Agricole), bought the senior tranche onto its own balance sheet. 
These European relationships, Finkel said, enabled DCP to market extensively its CDOs to 
European and Asian investors. Earlier in the decade, foreign investors had viewed the US 
mortgage-backed debt markets with some trepidation. But their demand for yield, together 
with the favorable ratings, made subprime CDOs too attractive for them to pass up. 
Also, Finkel noted, the confidence of European and Asian investors grew as they saw the 
increasing volumes of securitization occurring. Furthermore, Finkel added, the CDO boom 
suggested to them the prospect —if they gained experience and came to know the market 
well—of a future fee business as a CDO asset manager. 
“The growth was feeding on itself in different directions,” said Finkel. Asian investors, Finkel 
continued, tended to be more skeptical and concerned with liquidity risk. But certain Asian 
accounts that had to buy long -dated assets for pension and insurance funds were the ones 
that stepped in. 
Finkel noted one investor concern that would prove prescient, namely downgrade risk: 
In retrospect, those investors were partially right. What everybody was missing was 
the sensitivity of these asset -backed CDOs to ratings downgrades being deemed 
defaults and the extreme downgrades that the rating agencies engaged from late ’07 
into ’08, which made the deals unwind. 
417
Lessons Learned: James Finkel Kasoff and Lieber

--- Page 6 ---
DCP stayed away from synthetic CDOs and subprime shorts because they harbored 
greater credit risk. 
Regarding short selling of subprime RMBS and the short-driven CDOs, Finkel reiterated that 
his main concern was credit quality, not ulterior motives or conflicts of interest. DCP avoided 
buying tranches of other mezzanine CDOs, said Finkel, “not because [t hey] were concerned 
about groups like [hedge funds] Paulson and Magnetar [Capital], but rather because [they] 
were concerned about the fundamental nature of the RMBS tranches [within those CDOs].” 
Finkel described on incident: 
One dealer said, “We’ll do 50% of the equity tranche, as well, at the underwriter level.” 
We couldn’t make any sense of those transactions and only much later realized they 
were largely dumping grounds for short sellers. But really, for us, those deals were all 
being done with riskier collateral, the BBB collateral, and we just weren’t comfortable 
with putting BBB credits into a CDO. 
To the extent DCP was aware of investors taking short positions, Finkel said, they thought 
that those were market-spread plays. 
The CDO juggernaut was based on a “flawed process,” which tainted many participants 
in ways that still haven’t all been addressed. 
Rewards from DCP’s more cautious approach as a CDO investor were largely, but not 
entirely, lost to forced wind -downs in 2008. Two of its 10 CDOs still  exist, and its credit 
opportunities funds survived a 30% loss. Most of its CDOs would have paid off, Finkel said, 
“but [the CDOs] were forced into unwinds in the worst possible market, by the super senior 
holders, by the investment banks themselves.” Scra mbling for cash and safety, the dealers’ 
risk managers and senior executives were forced to make panic sales. 
“It’s a flawed process,” Finkel reflected, “to create a credit product where the pace, velocity, 
and the volume of it is so high that diligent cre dit investors don’t have a chance to do their 
work.” Earlier regulatory interventions might have had a stabilizing effect, he thought, 
recognizing, however, that in the midst of the boom, “it was just in nobody’s interest to slow 
it down.” 
It is widely rec ognized that the CDO juggernaut could not have taken off without the 
participation of credit rating agencies such as Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s, which 
provided the ratings that investors relied on. 
In Finkel’s opinion, the rating agencies should have be en taken more to task. Their special 
status created a perverse incentive for them to sign off on CDO tranches with AAA approvals. 
US regulators, as Finkel explained, feared that punishing S&P and Moody’s would erode the 
broader rating function and substant ially damage US fixed -income markets across all 
sectors. 
The major dealer firms altered their business models as they chased the CDO boom. They 
were “riven”—split internally between a CDO unit making wild profits and risk managers 
418
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
and senior executives who failed to exert appropriate controls. These investment bank 
dealers were “out of control,” Finkel said, profiting from the short business more than they 
were manipulated by it. “The left hand didn’t know what the right hand was doing inside the 
banks.” 
The banks went from the storage business (where they used to hold loans on the 
balance sheet) to being just in the moving business—they were just moving risk for a 
fee. And they had insidious ways of profiting. They built what they believed were 
arbitrage risk -free trades, and present valued them and paid themselves huge 
bonuses. 
According to Finkel, the shorts were not arbitraging the banks, rather  the banks were in ca-
hoots with the shorts to a large extent. They were making money in many ways with the 
short sellers, Finkel said. He thinks that r eforms have corrected much of the dysfunction at 
the investment banks. But it is an episode that has passed, a pattern that may to some degree 
persist, that people still don’t entirely understand. 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: April 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-47 
 
419
Lessons Learned: James Finkel Kasoff and Lieber