--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 2 
2022 
Lessons Learned: Brooksley Born Lessons Learned: Brooksley Born 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, 
Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, 
and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Haggerty, Maryann (2022) "Lessons Learned: Brooksley Born," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 2, 
2027-2030. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1380 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/91 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss2/91

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Brooksley Born 
By Maryann Haggerty 
Brooksley Born, a lawyer with decades of experience in derivatives law, served as chair of the 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) from 1996 to 1999. At the CFTC, she advocated 
for federal regulation of the over -the-counter derivatives (OTC) market, but legislation failed 
to pass. The OTC derivatives market had a central role in  the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-
09. Born, who retur ned to private practice after her CFTC term, served as a commissioner on 
the US Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, which investigated the causes of the crisis and 
issued its report in January 2011. This “Lessons Learned” is based on an interview with Ms. Born. 
The financial services industry has great political power. 
During Born’s term as chair of the CFTC, she was engaged in a contentious debate about the 
fast-growing and lightly regulated OTC derivatives market. She recalled, “We  were asking 
questions about central clearing, use of transaction execution facilities, exchange-like or 
online, requirements for OTC derivatives dealers like record keeping, reporting, sales 
practice requirements, capital requirements, disclosure requirements, and internal 
controls.” Those ideas were contained in what was called a “concept release” that discussed 
possible regulations. “When  we published the concept release in May 1998, there was a 
firestorm of opposition.” The industry actively opposed regulation. M any in government 
agreed, but Born did not. 
She described the opposition this way, 
The political power of the financial services industry has led to a significant degree of 
regulatory capture among federal financial regulators and undue deference to the 
industry by members of Congress. 
… There was fierce opposition from all of the big over-the-counter derivatives dealers, 
which were our largest financial institutions. This unregulated, nontransparent 
market was, as we discovered later, one of their largest profit centers. They were 
making a tremendous amount of money, partly because the market was not 
transparent and was not competitive. There was often little clear pricing information 
available to their counterparties. The dealers wanted to preserve this la ck of 
transparency. 
There had been 20 or 30 years of deregulatory pressures, largely stimulated by the 
financial services industry, but also championed by people like Federal Reserve Board 
Chair Alan Greenspan. The financial services industry at this point had great political 
power. They were among the very largest campaign contribution donors. They had 
large forces lobbying before both Congress and the executive branch financial 
regulators. And they exerted a tremendous amount of power. 
2027

--- Page 4 ---
While it can never be predicted whether more regulation could help avoid effects that 
create systemic risk, all sides of the argument and possible long -term impacts are 
worth considering.  
In 1998, while Born was chair, the CFTC issued a “concept release” reexamining its approach 
to the OTC derivatives, which were then exempt from regulation, and seeking public 
comment. The release identified observed developments in derivative s innovation, raised 
concerns about the sufficiency of the current regulatory scheme, and prop osed enhanced 
regulation. Many of Born’s colleagues and industry leaders felt that enhanced regulation was 
not necessary and would dampen the market’s growth. Two years later, the Commodity 
Futures Modernization Act of 2000 further deregulated OTC derivatives trading. The result, 
in Born’s view, was that a dangerous industry  was allowed to grow unchecked, threatening 
the stability of the rest of the system. 
She said, 
Adequate information about the over -the-counter derivatives market would  have 
made a tremen dous difference. If this had been a regulated market, it  would have 
been transparent. Federal  regulators would have been able to see the size of the 
positions, the extent of the trading, the amount of speculation,  and the 
interconnectivity among market participants. They could have stepped in when they 
saw the extent of counterparty credit risk , to require central clearing, reducing the 
risk by interposing the clearing facility between the parties. They could have seen the 
extent of speculation that was inflating the risk posed by the mortgage market by 
multiplying it exponentially in terms of potential losses. 
The unregulated OTC derivatives market created systemic risk that fed the financial 
crisis. 
The OTC derivatives market grew steeply and quickly in the early 2000s, reaching more than 
$670 trillion in notional value by the time of the 2007 09 financial crisis. (Notional value is 
the value of the securities that underlie derivatives.) Born was a member of the federal 
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commissio n (FCIC), which examined the causes underlying that 
crisis in the United States, including the role of derivatives. Among the types of derivatives 
examined were credit default swaps (CDS) and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), both 
of which allowed bets on packages of mortgages. 
Speaking of the FCIC’s findings, Born elaborated,  
What we found in terms of over-the-counter derivatives was that allowing this 
enormous unregulated market to grow without oversight or regulation led to  
substantial financial systemic risk and contributed to the magnitude of the crisis. The 
market was not transparent. It was highly leveraged. There was  excessive 
speculation. It created interconnections between systemically important financial 
institutions that had the effect of allowing losses to cascade through the system. 
2028
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
… In addition to the role played by credit default swaps in the financial crisis, the FCIC 
found that the interconnections created by over -the-counter derivatives of all kinds 
among the biggest financial institutions, and also with other large  corporations and 
institutions, caused rippling effects of losses to spread throughout the financial 
system and multiplied the risks in the financial crisis. For example, when Lehman 
Brothers went in to bankruptcy in September  2008, it was a party to more than 
900,000 over-the-counter derivatives contracts. Its failure created panic in the 
market and almost brought down the financial system. 
Despite increased post-crisis regulation, much of the OTC derivatives market remains 
opaque and thus a threat to financial stability. 
The Dodd-Frank Act, the package of US financial market regulatory changes adopted in the 
wake of the Global Financial Crisis, increased oversight of the derivatives market to a degree. 
Among other changes, it required central clearing of some types of derivatives, a process that 
reduces direct counterparty risk, though it may shift risk to the clearinghouse. 
However, as of year-end 2020, there was still more than $600 trillion (notional value) of OTC 
derivatives outstanding, “and  probably less than half  of that is subject to central  clearing,” 
Born pointed out. In her view, regulators still do not have the insight they need into this 
market. 
As an example, she discussed a recent event, 
We just had the collapse of Archegos. That seems to be a replay of Long-Term Capital 
Management in 1998. It is a large, unregulated investment vehicle speculating 
through over-the-counter derivatives, this time a kind of security swap, with virtually 
unlimited leverage. It avoided disclosure of its position as required by the securities 
laws by using over-the- counter derivatives that mimicked securities. It entered into 
these transactions through a number of over -the-counter derivatives dealers which  
probably had no idea that the entity was exposed to large positions taken with several 
other dealers. Goldman Sachs, Nomura, Deutsche Bank, Credit Suisse , and others 
were its dealers. Suddenly Archegos was unable to meet its collateral obligations on 
its contracts and defaulted. Luckily, it looks like Archegos’ collapse did not cause 
cascading losses through the financial system    that could not be contained. Apparently, 
its dealers were able to manage the substantial losses they have incurred. But it does 
show that this is still a dark, highly leveraged, and speculative market. There is a large 
part that is unknown to anybody. This may be the result of a failure on the part of the 
Securities and Exchange Commission to adequately and fully implement and enforce 
the Dodd-Frank Act’s requirements as to securities-based, over-the-counter 
derivatives. 
Necessary transparency can be achieved, “very easily,” she said. 
You require virtually all of the market to be traded on regulated exchanges, open and 
transparent to the public and to the regulators. Competitive trading on such 
exchanges will provide necessary price discovery. You also require virtually all of the 
2029
Lessons Learned: Brooksley Born Haggerty

--- Page 6 ---
market to be cleared through a regulated  central clearing operation with rigorous 
margin requirements, marking to  market of the pricing , and position limits on 
speculation. That is the playbook that the regulated futures and options markets have 
operated under for decades as provided in the Commodity Exchange Act. 
The industry will resist, she opined. That presents a critical challenge to officials, 
Again, and I am repeating myself, it is very important for policymakers, regulators, 
and supervisors to distance themselves from thinking that their purpose is to further 
the interest of a particular industry. It is very easy when enormous political power 
and money are being expended by an industry to  forget that the industry’s interests 
are not the pub lic interest. And there is no  reason to have regulation if it is not to 
further the public interest. 
_____________________________________ 
Dated: July 2022 
YPFS Lessons Learned No.: 2021-13 
2030
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 2