--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 4 Issue 1 
2022 
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G: The Auto Warranty The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G: The Auto Warranty 
Commitment Program Commitment Program 
Benjamin Henken 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Economic Policy Commons, Finance Commons, Finance and 
Financial Management Commons, Growth and Development Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Henken, Benjamin (2022) "The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G: The Auto Warranty 
Commitment Program," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 4 : Iss. 1, 282-299. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1264 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/8 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol4/iss1/8

--- Page 3 ---
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G: 
The Auto Warranty Commitment Program1 
Benjamin Henken2 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
January 16, 2019; Revised Date: April 8, 2022 
Abstract 
On March 30, 2009, President Barack Obama announced a plan for government -funded 
protection of warranties on new vehicles sold by General Motors (GM) and Chrysler while 
the companies underwent restructuring. The initiative, which would become known as the 
Auto Warranty Commitment Program (AWCP), was intended to bolster consumer 
confidence by alleviating a major risk —the loss of warranty benefits —to consumers 
associated with the companies’ potential bankruptcies. Under the AWCP, GM and Chrysler 
established i ndependent special purpose vehicles  (SPVs) to which they transferred a 
combination of their own money along with funding they received from Treasury in the form 
of a loan. The SPV then acted as an insurance fund, guaranteeing the availability of cash to 
respond to eligible warranty claims should either company fail or otherwise become unable 
to meet new claims on its  own. The program closed on July 21, 2009, without either 
company’s SPV having been called into action. At the time of its announcement, the program 
received generally positive reviews from some in the industry and media, although there 
were concerns that the program would be more difficult to implement than the 
administration had described. 
 
1 This case is one of eight Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) modules considering the various elements 
of the government’s rescue of the US auto Industry and published in 2022: 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module A: Automotive Bridge Loans” by Alexander Nye. 
• “The Rescue of the  US Auto Industry, Module B: Restructuring General Motors Through Bankruptcy” 
by Kaleb B. Nygaard. 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module C: Restructuring Chrysler Through Bankruptcy” by 
Alexander Nye. 
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module D: Emergency Assistance to Ally Financial (formerly 
GMAC)” by Riki Matsumoto and Kaleb B. Nygaard.  
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module E: Emergency Assistance for Chrysler Financial” by 
Alexander Nye.  
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module F: Auto Supplier Support Program” by Riki Matsumoto.  
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module G: The Auto Warranty Commitment Program” by 
Benjamin Henken.  
• “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module Z: Overview” by Rosalind Z . Wiggins, Greg Fel dberg, 
Alexander Nye, and Andrew Metrick.  
Cases are available from the Journal of Financial Crises  at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal -of-
financial-crises/.2021. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
282

--- Page 4 ---
Keywords: Automotive Industry Financing Program, Auto Warranty Commitment Program, 
Chrysler, General Motors, warranty  
283
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
At a Glance  
On March 30, 2009, President Barack Obama 
delivered a speech on the government’s 
support and restructuring of General Motors 
(GM) and Chrysler. The two companies had 
just failed to receive approval for their 
restructuring plans from the President’s 
Auto Ta sk Force and, as a result, were 
refused the long-term funding they had been 
seeking. 
Given the scope of the challenges GM and 
Chrysler confronted, President Obama 
stressed the growing possibility of their 
having to file for bankruptcy. But rather than 
leading to their liquidation, bankruptcy 
would be used as a restructuring “tool” to 
allow the companies to swiftly dispose of 
legacy debts while still being able to 
maintain operations. However, due to 
negative public perceptions of bankruptcy, 
government offi cials and company 
executives feared that simply introducing its possibility—no matter how much sense it made 
for the companies —would drain public confidence in the firms, posing yet another risk to 
their viability as demand for their vehicles plummeted. 
Therefore, at the same time, President Obama also announced a plan for a government -
funded guarantee of consumer warranties on GM and Chrysler vehicles purchased while they 
underwent restructuring. The initiative, which would become known as the Auto Warrant y 
Commitment Program (AWCP), was intended to bolster consumer confidence by alleviating 
the risk of loss of auto warranty benefits associated with the companies’ potential 
bankruptcies. Under the AWCP, GM and Chrysler established independent special purpos e 
vehicles (SPVs) to which they transferred a combination of their own money and funding 
they received from the US Department of the Treasury (Treasury) in the form of a loan. The 
SPV then acted as an insurance fund, guaranteeing the availability of cash t o respond to 
eligible warranty claims should either company fail or otherwise become unable to meet 
those claims on its own. 
At the outset, Treasury dedicated up to $1.1 billion for the AWCP’s implementation. In the 
end, it extended a total of $640.7 million in loans to GM and Chrysler. The program closed on 
Summary of Key Terms 
Purpose: To fund guarantees of warranties on all 
new vehicles sold by General Motors and Chrysler 
while they underwent a government-assisted 
bankruptcy and restructuring 
Announcement date March 30, 2009 
Termination date July 10, 2009 
Legal authority Troubled Assets Relief 
Program 
Total commitment $1.1 billion 
Peak utilization  $640.7 million 
Term of loan July 31, 2010 (in the case 
of GM) and June 30, 
2010 (in the case of 
Chrysler) 
Interest rate The greater of LIBOR + 
350 basis points (bp) 
and 550 bp 
Net revenue $5.5 million 
Participants/borrowers General Motors Corp.; 
Chrysler LLC 
Administrator/lender US Dept. of the Treasury   
Auto Warranty Commitment Program 
284
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G Henken

--- Page 6 ---
July 21, 2009, without either company’s SPV having been required to pay warranty claims. 
Treasury recouped all loan principal and netted $5.5 million in interest payments.  
Summary Evaluation 
Given its size relative to the other components of the auto industry rescue, the AWCP has 
received comparatively little scrutiny from the academic community. No analysis has 
attempted to isolate its effect on demand for the companies’ vehicles or its overall impact on 
GM and Chrysler’s restructuring efforts. 
At the time of its announcement, the AWCP received a generally positive reception from 
those in the auto industry as well as the media, although there were concerns that the 
program was too vague and that its pro per implementation —if necessary —would be 
difficult.  
  
285
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
Auto Warranty Commitment Program: United States Context 2008–2009 
GDP 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted 
to USD) 
$14,559.5 billion in 2008 
$14,628.0 billion in 2009 
GDP per capita 
(SAAR, Nominal GDP in LCU converted 
to USD) 
$48,383 in 2008 
$47,100 in 2009 
Sovereign credit rating  
(5-year senior debt) 
 
As of Q4, 2008: 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
 
As of Q4, 2009: 
Fitch: AAA 
Moody’s: Aaa 
S&P: AAA 
Size of banking system 
 
$9,938.3 billion in total assets in 2008 
$9,789.1 billion in total assets in 2009 
Size of banking system as a percentage 
of GDP 
 
68.3% in 2008 
66.9% in 2009 
Size of banking system as a percentage  
of financial system 
 
30.5% in 2008 
30.2% in 2009 
5-bank concentration of banking 
system 
 
45% in 2008 
44% in 2009 
Foreign involvement in banking 
system 
18% in 2008 
16% in 2009 
Government ownership of banking 
system 
0% in 2008 
0% in 2009 
Existence of deposit insurance 
100% insurance on deposits up to 
$250,000 in 2008 
100% insurance on deposits up to 
$250,000 in 2009 
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Global Financial Development Database; Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation; World Bank, Bank Regulation and Supervision 
Survey. 
286
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G Henken

--- Page 8 ---
I. Overview 
Background 
During the fall of 2008, as General Motors (GM) and Chrysler headed toward collapse, they 
repeatedly asked the US government for emergency support. On December 19, 2008, the US 
Treasury, at the direction of President George W. Bush, agreed to ex tend emergency bridge 
loans to the companies so that they could fulfill their immediate liquidity requirements. The 
bridge loans were positioned as stopgap measures designed to achieve two main purposes: 
(1) to ensure that GM and Chrysler would survive the presidential transition, and (2) to force 
the companies to revamp their business models and begin restructuring into long -term 
viable entities (Paulson 2010). 
Pursuant to the bridge loan agreements, GM and Chrysler received a total of $23.4 billion in 
emergency funding on the condition that, among other criteria, they would design and 
implement in-depth restructuring plans. The plans were to be reviewed by the President’s 
Auto Task Force, whose evaluation was key to determining whether the government would  
fund the companies through their restructuring (COP 2009). 
On March 30, 2009, when President Obama announced that the Task Force’s review was 
complete, he disclosed that, in the Auto Task Force’s view, neither company had formulated 
a plan that was likely to lead to viability. As a result, GM and Chrysler were refused the long-
term government investments they were seeking. But rather than cut off their funding 
entirely, the Obama Administration agreed to lend them additional working capital designed 
to last the next 30 days (Chrysler) and 60 days (GM), on the condition that they use the time 
to work with the government to create viable restructuring plans (Treasury 2009b; Obama 
2009).  
At the same time, President Obama announced to the public that, even with the introduction 
of viable restructuring plans , GM and Chrysler were unlikely to avoid filing for bankruptcy. 
Rather than force their liquidation, bankruptcy would be used as a restructuring “tool” tha t 
would facilitate swift reorganizations. GM and Chrysler could “quickly clear away old debt” 
while maintaining operations. But both government officials and company executives feared 
that simply introducing the possibility of bankruptcy, no matter how much sense it made for 
the companies , would drain public confidence in the firms, posing more systemic risks 
(Treasury 2009b; Obama 2009).    
Program Description 
On March 30, 2009, President Obama also announced government -funded protection 3 of 
consumer warr anties on GM and Chrysler vehicles purchased while they underwent 
 
3 While sometimes called a “government guarantee ,” technically, under the AWCP, the government did not 
provide a guarantee. It was the related non -government SPVs (established by the participating auto 
manufacturers) that guaranteed the warranties. The government, in this case  Treasury, indirectly provided 
287
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
restructuring (Treasury 2009b; Obama 2009) . The new Auto Warranty Commitment 
Program (AWCP) was intended to “give consumers who [were] considering new car 
purchases the confidence that even in this difficult economic period, their  warrantees 
[would] be honored. ” Although the AWCP was announced in direct support of GM and 
Chrysler, participation was open to all domestic automakers.  GM and Chrysler, however, 
were the only two manufacturers who chose to participate (Treasury 2009a).   
Under the AWCP, GM and Chrysler each created a new, bankruptcy-remote, special purpose 
vehicle (SPV) to which they transferred funding equal to 125% of the expected cost of 
warranty obligations 4 on each new vehicle they sold, 15% of which they provided 
themselves and the remainder of which (110%) they funded with a Treasury loan (Treasury 
2009a).  In the event of a “Business Failure”5 or in the event that the automaker otherwise 
became unable to  meet its warranty obligations, the SPV would appoint (with Treasury’s 
approval) one or more third-party program administrators to assume the automaker’s 
warranty liabilities and be paid through the funding held by the SPV (Chrysler and Treasury 
2009; GM and Treasury 2008; Treasury 2009a).  
Terms of the Loans 
Immediately following the announcement of the AWCP in March, Treasury dedicated up to 
$1.1 billion in funding for its implementation. Of that, $640.7 million in loans were ultimately 
disbursed for the establishment of each company’s AWCP SPV: $280.1 million to Chrysler on 
April 29, 2009 , and $360.6 million to GM on May 27  (Treasury 2018) . These funds were 
subsequently transferred by the two companies to their respective SPVs, as contemplated. 
Treasury funded the loans through the Troubled Asset s Relief Program (TARP), the $750 
billion pool of money created under the Emergency Economic Stability Act of 2008  (EESA) 
(EESA 2008). The loans carried an interest rate of the greater of 550 basis points (bp) or the 
London Interbank Offered Rate (Libor) plus 350 basis points. The loans came with 
promissory notes for 6.67% of the value of any advances drawn upon under the AWCP but 
were also secure d by a commensurate stake in GM and Chrysler’s warranty SPVs 6 and by 
“Guaranty Collateral” that included a security interest in all of the collateral owned by the 
relevant warranty SPV. The loans were drawn up as amendments to the loan and security 
agreements originally entered into between Treasury and the automakers in December 2008 
 
funding to support the SPVs’ commitments. More accurately, the government “provide[d] government -funded 
protection for warrantees issued by participat ing domestic auto manufacturers” (Treasury 2009b). It labeled 
the ACWP as the “Obama Administration’s New Warrantee Commitment Program” (Treasury 2009a).  
4 For an automaker, the expected cost of a warranty, in simplified terms, is the likelihood of the warranty being 
called upon multiplied by the average cost of fulfilling its obligations under the warranty (Chrysler and 
Treasury 2008; GM and Treasury 2008). 
5 The loan agreement between Treasury and each manufacturer defined a company failure as: “a bankruptcy, 
other reorganization, restructuring or cessation of business of General Motors Corporation in which it or any 
Subsidiary or Affiliate terminates, dish onors or rejects Limited Warranty Obligations, but excludes a 
reorganization or restructuring for purposes of implementing a plan acceptable to [Treasury]” (Chrysler and 
Treasury 2009; GM and Treasury 2008). 
6 While Treasury funding to GM and Chrysler for the AWCP was structured as a loan, the funding was used to 
“capitalize” their SPVs, and so in return Treasury received a commensurate stake in each (Chrysler and 
Treasury 2009; GM and Treasury 2008). 
288
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G Henken

--- Page 10 ---
and January 2009 (Chrysler and Treasury 2009; GM  and Treasury 2008) . For more 
information on the original loan and security agreements, which facilitated the emergency 
bridge loans, see Nye 2021. 
The AWCP was set to expire on June 30, 2010, for Chrysler and on July 31, 2010, for GM. GM 
and Chrysler could exit the program any time after they finished restructuring.7 Funding held 
by the SPVs following a company’s exit from the program (assuming its exit was due to 
completing restructuring and not failing) would be used first to pay interest and reduce 
principal on the Treasury loan. GM and Chrysler would then be entitled to any funds left over 
(Chrysler and Treasury 2009; GM and Treasury 2008).  
Outcomes 
Programmatic 
Soon after receiving the funding , both companies filed for bankruptcy and were supported 
through that process by TARP debtor-in-possession (DIP) loans. By July 2009, both GM and 
Chrysler had successfully emerged from bankruptcy , having completed the most essential 
phase of their restructu ring. By July 10, although other obligations to the government 
remained outstanding, GM and Chrysler paid back all AWCP loan principal plus $5.5 million 
in interest.8 The program subsequently closed without either company having called upon 
the guarantee (SIGTARP 2009). 
GM and Chrysler Vehicle Sales 
As shown in Figure 1, consistent with broader market trends, GM’s net revenue from sales 
began to decline in first -quarter 2008 and fell more sharply from fall 2008 through first -
quarter 2009. Even though the company had yet to emerge from bankruptcy, its net revenue 
from sales began to stabilize during second-quarter 2009 when the AWCP was implemented. 
However, sales generally d id not start to rebound until after GM’s completion of a major 
restructuring and emergence from bankruptcy in the summer of 2009. Because Chrysler was 
a private company prior to the crisis, quarterly data on its sales revenue were not publicly 
available for comparison. 
 
7 What it would mean to “finish restructuring” was left undefined, but presumably this meant emerging from 
bankruptcy. To exit the program after finishing restructuring, the companies were required to provide written 
notice to this effect. 
8 Only Chrysler paid interest on the AWCP funding; GM repaid only the principal (Allison 2009). Chrysler repaid 
the $280.1 million warranty loan and related interest due when other pre -bankruptcy loans (but not the 
warranty loan) were transferred to the post -bankruptcy Chrysler. W ith respect to GM, it appears that the 
principal of the $360.6 million warranty loan was transferred to new GM along with other pre-bankruptcy loan 
obligations, but it is not clear why GM’s interest obligations from the warranty loan seem to have gone unpa id 
(Treasury 2018). 
289
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 1: General Motors Net Sales Revenue, 2007–2010 
 
Source: Compustat Capital IQ. 
II. Key Design Decisions  
1. The AWCP was a small part of Treasury’s broader initiative to rescue and 
restructure the US auto industry.  
The US government’s strategy for assisting the struggling US auto industry was largely ad-
hoc and evolved considerably over time. Treasury’s original stated purpose for intervening 
was to prevent the immediate collapse of GM and Chrysler —at the time two of the three 
largest US automakers—an event that was widely expected to be destabilizing for the entire 
industry (COP 2009). The AWCP constituted just  $0.6 billion of the $79.7 billion in TARP 
funding ultimately disbursed in support of GM and Chrysler’s restructurings and to assist 
other key players in the industry as well, including two auto finance companies (General 
Motors Acceptance Corporation and Chrysler Financial) and auto parts suppliers (Treasury 
2018). 
2. Legal authority for intervention in the US auto industry came from the Troubled 
Assets Relief Program.  
Created with the enactment of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act (EESA) in October 
2008, the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) enabled the US Treasury to “purchase and 
insure certain types of assets for the purposes of providing stability to and preventing 
disruption in the economy and financial system” (EESA 2008). In additi on to targeting 
distressed mortgage -related holdings of US financial institutions, the law also enabled 
Treasury to purchase “any other financial instrument that the [Treasury] Secretary, after 
consultation with the Chairman of the Board of Governors of th e Federal Reserve System, 
determines the purchase of which is necessary to promoting financial market stability” 
(EESA 2008). That clause proved essential when, in December 2008, it became apparent 
AWCP established 
March 30, 2009
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Billions of dollars
290
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G Henken

--- Page 12 ---
that no resolution for the auto industry would take hold in Congress (Nye 2021). As a result, 
the Bush Treasury used the flexibility built into EESA to justify extending GM and Chrysler 
emergency loans (Bush 2008).  
3. President Obama announced the creation of the AWCP in a televised speech.  
President Obama announced the warranty protection plan in a speech delivered to the 
public on March 30, 2009 , speaking directly to American consumers whom the program 
targeted. Before discussing the AWCP, the President explained why the government was 
assisting the automakers. He described the process that had been applied, including judging 
their restructuring plans to be inadequate, and the decision to provide further working 
capital to give the companies a second chance. In particular, the President explained how 
bankruptcy might be employed as a “tool” to speed the restructuring of the automakers.  He 
then explained how the AWCP would work in broad terms, while also taking pains to 
describe such things as automatic enrollment for purchases of eligible cars (Obama 2009). 
The President’s speech was supplemented by the release of a program fact sheet on the 
White House and Treasury websites (Treasury 2009a). 
4. The AWCP was open to participation by all domestic automakers.  
Even though President Obama announced the program in support of GM and Chrysler, in its 
fact sheet Treasury confirmed that “any domestic auto manufacturer [was] eligible to 
participate in the program” (Treasury 2009a). No other manufacturers chose to participate 
(Treasury 2018).   
5. The AWCP provided funding that indirectly guaranteed warranties on new 
vehicles sold by GM and Chrysler during their restructuring to bolster consumer 
confidence in the companies.  
The looming threat of a GM or Chrysler bankruptcy  had the potential to negatively and 
possibly significantly affect demand for the companies’ vehicles. While President Obama 
attempted to position bankruptcy as a valuable restructuring tool, there was great risk that 
consumers would view the announcement as confirmation of the firms’ precarious futures , 
and thus be hesitant to purchase one of their vehicles (COP 2009). For consumers, 
bankruptcy put at risk  the fulfillment of warranty benefits and would likely result in the 
closure of many dealerships and service centers as well as a huge drop in vehicle resale value 
(COP 2009; GM 2008). Given these risks, it was thought that some consumers would avoid 
GM and Chrysler offerings entirely in favor of vehicles sold by financially sound automakers. 
As a result, on March 30, 2009, at the same time that he announced the possibility of a GM or 
Chrysler bankruptcy, President Obama also took the step of announcing a government -
funded protection plan for warranties on vehicles the companies sold while restructuring. 
While concern over the future of GM and Chrysler would remain, the program was intended 
to alleviate a major risk associated with bankruptcy and , to the maximum extent possible , 
bolster consumer confidence in their vehicles (Treasury 2009a). 
291
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
6. GM and Chrysler were required to create new SPVs to which they transferred 
funding to be held in reserve in case of their failures.  
The AWCP required a participating auto manufacturer to esta blish an independent 
bankruptcy-remote SPV to guarantee the warranties; the guarantees did not flow from the 
manufacturer or the government. Guarantees normally do not require upfront payments by 
the guarantors; rather, auto manufacturers typically establish an accounting reserve to cover 
the expected cost of providing warranty services on each newly sold vehicle. The AWCP 
required Treasury and the participating manufacturers to pre -fund the SPV so that the 
funding backing the guarantee would be set aside. In the event of either company’s failure, 
the SPV , a separate legal entity , would remain financially able to meet the warranty 
commitments (Treasury 2009a).   
7. Each SPV was funded by contributions from Treasury and the participating 
automaker’s funding.   
Each participating automaker and Treasury together contributed funding equal to 125% of 
the expected cost of fulfilling warranties on eligible vehicles they projected to sell while 
restructuring, with 88% contributed by Treasury and 12% contributed by the p articipant 
(Chrysler and Treasury 2009; GM and Treasury 2008).9 GM and Chrysler were responsible 
for providing 15% of this amount (as 12% of 125% is 15%  of the overall total)  and funded 
the remainder with a Treasury loan (Treasury 2009a). Treasury did not state why it divided 
the funding in this manner. 
The companies calculated the expected cost of warranty obligations using historical data on 
warranty payouts in years past. If at any point during the program warranty cost 
expectations increased by more than 10% ( for example,  by the companies selling more 
vehicles than expected or due to an unforeseen increase in the average cost of fulfilling each 
eligible warranty), the companies were required to deposit into the SPV additional funds to 
cover this increase (Chrysler and Treasury 200 9; GM and Treasury 2008) . The 
administration agreements do not detail how this historical data would be used to compute 
the expected cost of warranty data.   
8. Treasury extended loans to each participating manufacturer to s upport the 
warranty commitment.  
Treasury originally committed up to $1.1 billion for the program and ultimately disbursed 
$640.7 million in loans. Treasury extended Chrysler a loan worth $280.1 million on April 29 
and GM a loan worth $360.6 million on May 27 (Treasury 2018). 
Treasury’s loans to each manufacturer had an interest  rate of the greater of ( 1) the three-
month Libor plus 350 basis points, or ( 2) 550 basis points. The loans were payable by 30 
days after the termination of the facility, which was J une 30, 2010, for Chrysler and July 31, 
 
9 Based on available information, it is unclear how long each company expected to be in restructuring and thus 
over how long of a timeframe they projected these costs. 
292
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G Henken

--- Page 14 ---
2010, for GM (or, whichever was earlier, 30 days after the entrance of the warranty SPV into 
an arrangement with a third-party administrator or 30 days after notice of a successfully 
completed restructuring) (Chrysler and Treasury 2009; GM and Treasury 2008). There is no 
data available that explains why Treasury chose these dates to terminate the facility or why 
the dates differ for the two automotive companies.  
9. Treasury’s loans were secured by  a senior lien on the SPV’s assets after the 
program’s end. 
Treasury’s loan was designed to comprise 88% of the total funding in each warranty SPV. If 
the AWCP ended with the funding in each company’s SPV having gone unused, Treasury 
would be entitled to receive  what it had accrued. However, if one of the companies failed 
and its SPV had to be put to use, Treasury had no recourse other than its investment plus any 
interest that might remain after the program’s end. Treasury stood first in line (ahead of the 
companies) to receive any funding left over (Chrysler and Treasury 2009; GM and Treasury 
2008)  
10. Consumers who purchased an eligible vehicle were automatically registered for 
the program.  
To be eligible, a vehicle had to be new and sold by a participating automaker while it 
restructured. For those purchasing an eligible vehicle, registration for the program was 
“automatic.” As explained to consumers on the AWCP Fact Sheet: “You do not have to do 
anything to receive the US commitment to your warrantee [ sic]. It is automatic” (Treasury 
2009a).  President Obama stated the same in his speech  announcing the program (Obama 
2009). Individuals owning a GM or Chrysler vehicle at the time of the program’s 
announcement, or purchasing a used car during the restructuring, would continue to be 
covered by outstanding warranties, but would not receive benefits under the AWCP 
(Treasury 2009a).  
11. The failure of either automaker would trigger a search for a third party capable of 
taking over its warranty obligations.  
If GM or Chrysler were to fail, its SPV would be given a 10-day period during which to try to 
locate a third party willing to accept the warranty obligations in exchange for the funding it 
held. If the 10-day period passed and no suitor was found, Treasury’s program 
administrator would seek to carry out this. During this time, the program administrator 
would be responsible for fulfilling a range of duties, including structuring the processing of 
claims, assuring their validity, cutting down on fraud, and doing “other administrative 
functions” as needed (Chrysler and Treasury 2009; GM and  Treasury 2008) . The 
government believed it wo uld not be difficult to find a suitor. “Because of the significant 
funding of the reserve account, Treasury is confident that qualified third parties will be 
interested in taking over the warranty obligations” (Treasury 2009a).  
293
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
12.  The Canadian government simultaneously guaranteed warranties on new GM and 
Chrysler vehicles sold in Canada.  
Canada established a warranty guarantee program similar to the AWCP. The Canadian 
Warranty Commitment Program, announced on April 7, 2009, supported new vehicle 
warranties for GM and Chrysler customers with the “goal . . . to increase consumer confidence 
and encourage Canadians to buy new cars” (Industry Canada 2009a). The program ended on 
September 16, 2009, after both companies emerged from bankruptcy (Industry Canada 
2009b).  
The Canadian government stated: 
Under the Canadian Warranty Commitment Program, the federal government is 
committed to honouring consumer warranties on new vehicles purchased from GMCL 
or Chrysler Canada for a limited period while improved restructuring plans are put 
in place (Industry Canada 2009a).  
It described the warranty program as one that “paralleled the US warranty program 
announced by President Barack Obama on March 30, 2009” (Industry Canada 2009a).  
It appears that segregated information about the warranty commitments appears not to be 
publicly available.  The Auditor General of Canada criticized the lack of publc information 
about the use of the government’s loans, including the warranty program: “Industry Canada 
had limited documentation on the actual use of a $2.8 billion loan made to GM Canada for 
capital expenditures, warranty claims, and other general corporate purposes.” ( Auditor 
General Canada, Section 5.45). 
III. Evaluation  
Given its size relative to the other components of the auto industry rescue, the AWCP has 
received comparatively little scrutiny fr om the academic community. No analysis has 
attempted to isolate its effect on demand for the companies’ vehicles nor its overall impact 
on GM and Chrysler’s restructuring efforts. However, the AWCP did roughly coincide with 
auto sales’ lowest point in the recession (Goolsbee and Kruger 2015) . This raises the 
possibility that the AWCP may have helped stabilize sales during this time. 
At the time of its announcement, the AWCP received a generally positive reception from 
those in the auto industry as well as t he media, although there were concerns that the 
program was too vague and that its implementation , if necessary, might be difficult. On the 
positive end, Joe Serra, president of a major US dealership group, called the initiative a game-
changer, suggesting it would go a long way toward making consumers comfortable with 
buying a car from the companies (Roland and Truett 2009) . Clarence Ditlow, executive 
director of the Center for Auto Safety, criticized the program for not backing current vehicle 
owners and pointed out that safety recalls can occur years after warranties expire. He also 
questioned whether it would be as easy as Treasury thought to find a third -party warranty 
294
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G Henken

--- Page 16 ---
service provider to take over the program in the event the companies went out of busin ess  
(Fox News 2009).   
IV. References 
Allison, Herbert. 2009. Written Testimony of Herbert M. Allison, Jr., Assistant Secretary for 
Financial Stability.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4162. 
Bush, George W. 2008. “President Bush Discusses Administration’s Plan to Assist 
Automakers.” The White House. Fact sheet, December 19, 2008.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/president-bush-discusses-administrations-plan-assist-
automakers. 
Chrysler LLC, and Treasury Department(Chrysler and Treasury). 2009. “Loan and Security 
Agreement.” January 2, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/loan-and-security-agreement-between-
chrysler-and-us-department-treasury. 
Congressional Oversight Panel (COP). 2009. “September Oversight Report.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/september-oversight-report-use-tarp-funds-support-
and-reorganization-domestic-automotive. 
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA). Public Law 110-343, 122 Stat. 3765. 
October 3, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3365. 
Fox News. 2009. “Obama Warranty Plan Leaves Many GM, Chrysler Owners Vulnerable. ” 
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/obama-warranty-plan-leaves-many-gm-chrysler-
owners-vulnerable. 
General Motors Corporation  (GM). 2008. “General Motors Corporati on Restructuring Plan 
for Long-Term Viability.” Senate Banking Committee.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/general-motors-corporation-restructuring-plan-long-
term-viability. 
General Motors Corporation, and Treasury Department (GM and Treasury). 2008. “Warrant 
Agreement.” December 31, 2008.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4085. 
Goolsbee, Austan, and Alan Kruger. 2015. “A Retrospective Look at Rescuing and 
Restructuring General Motors and Chrysler.” NBER Working Paper Series, March.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/retrospective-look-rescuing-and-
restructuring-general-motors-and-chrysler. 
295
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
Industry Canada. 2009a. “Ministers Clement and Day Announce New Measures to Help Boost 
Consumer Confidence in Auto Industry.” Press release, April 7, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/ministers-clement-and-day-announce-new-measures-
help-boost-consumer-confidence-auto. 
———. 2009b. “Canadian Warranty Commitment Program Comes to a Close.” Press release, 
September 16, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/canadian-warranty-commitment-program-comes-close. 
———. 2014. “Summary Report on Canada ’s Support for the Restructuring of General 
Motors and Chrysler in 2009.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/summary-report-canadas-support-restructuring-
general-motors-and-chrysler-2009. 
Nye, Alexander. 2021. “The Rescue of the US Auto Industry , Module A: Automotive Bridge 
Loans.”   
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
Obama, Barack H. 2009. “Obama’s Announcement on the Auto Ind ustry.” New York Times . 
March 30, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/obamas-auto-industry. 
Office of the Auditor General of Canada  (Auditor General Canada). 2014. “2014 Fall Report 
of the Auditor General of Canada.”  
https://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_oag_201411_05_e_39963.html#hd5c 
Paulson, Henry M. Jr. 2010. On the Brink: Inside the Race to Stop the Collapse of the Global 
Financial System. New York: Business Plus, Hachette Book Group.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/brink-inside-race-stop-collapse-global-financial-system. 
Roland, Neil, and Richard Truett. 2009. “US Will Guarantee GM, Chrysler Warranties. ” 
Automotive News, March 30, 2009.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-will-guarantee-gm-chrysler-warranties. 
Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program , Office of the  (SIGTARP). 
2009. “SIGTARP Quarterly Report to Congress, October 21, 2009.”  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-october-21-2009. 
Treasury, US  Department of (Treasury). 2009a. “Obama Administration’s New Warrantee 
Commitment Program.” Press release, March 30, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/obama-administrations-new-warrantee-commitment-
program-fact-sheet. 
———. 2009b. “Obama Administration New Path to Viability for GM & Chrysler.” Fact sheet, 
March 31, 2009.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4060. 
296
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G Henken

--- Page 18 ---
———. 2018. “Transactions Report – Investment Programs For Period Ending October 5, 
2018.”   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/tarp-transactions-report-investments-period-ending-
october-5-2018. 
V. Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
(Treasury 2009a) Obama Administration’s New Warrantee Commitment Program   
US government fact sheet highlight key terms of the AWCP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/obama-administrations-new-warrantee-commitment-
program-fact-sheet. 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(Chrysler and Treasury 2009)  Chrysler Original Loan and Security Agreeme nt (with 
amendments)   
Original loan and security agreement entered into by Chrysler and Treasury on January 2, 2009; 
Amendment No. 4 and the corresponding Administration Agreement , signed May 27, 2009, 
concern the AWCP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/document/loan-and-security-agreement-between-
chrysler-and-us-department-treasury. 
(GM and Treasury 2008) GM Original Loan and Security Agreement (with amendments)   
Original loan se curity agreement entered into by GM and Treasury  on December 31, 2008 ; 
Amendment N o. 4 and the corresponding Administration Agreement , signed May 27, 2009, 
concern the AWCP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/4085. 
Press Releases/Announcements  
(Obama 2009) Remarks by the President on the American Automotive Industry  
Speech by President Obama announcing the results of the Auto Task Force’s review of GM and 
Chrysler’s restructuring plans and introducing what would become the AWCP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/obamas-announcement-auto-industry. 
Media Stories 
“Canada to guarantee new GM, Chrysler warranties.”  
Reuters article discussing Canada’s guarantee program associated with the AWCP.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/canada-guarantee-new-gm-chrysler-warranties. 
“Government Ends Warranty Program for GM, Chrysler.”  
Automotive News article discussing the termination of the AWCP.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/government-ends-warranty-program-gm-chrysler.  
297
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
(Roland and Truett 2009) “US Will Guarantee GM, Chrysler Warranties.”  
Article discussing the announcement of the AWCP.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/us-will-guarantee-gm-chrysler-warranties. 
“Understanding Obama’s Auto Warranty Plan.”  
New York Times column analyzing the AWCP on the day of its announcement.  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/understanding-obamas-auto-warranty-plan. 
Reports/Assessments 
(COP 2009) September Oversight Report: The Use of TARP Funds in the Support and 
Reorganization of the Domestic Automotive Industry  
Congressional Oversight Panel report analyzing and providing recommendations related to the 
creation, implementation, and issues raised by the use of TARP funds in the automotive bailout. 
  
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/september-oversight-report-use-tarp-funds-support-
and-reorganization-domestic-automotive. 
Freedom of Investment Process: Inventory of Investment Measures Taken between 1 
September 2009 and 14 February 2010  
OECD r eport assessing the effects of government interventions implemented globally in 
response to the GFC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/freedom-investment-process-inventory-investment-
measures-taken-between-1-september-2009-and. 
“SIGTARP Quarterly Report to Congress, April 21, 2009.  
First quarter of 2009  SIGTARP report that contains summaries of the AWCP and records 
spending from all programs within TARP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-april-21-2009 
“SIGTARP Quarterly Report to Congress, July 21, 2009.”        
Second quarter of 2009  report that contains summaries of the AWCP and records spending 
from all programs within TARP.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/quarterly-report-congress-july-21-2009. 
(SIGTARP 2009) “SIGTARP Quarterly Report to Congress, October 21, 2009.”  
SIGTARP report c overing all TARP programs and including key programmatic and financial 
details.    
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/library/sigtarp-quarterly-report-congress-october-21-2009. 
Status Report: Inventory of Investment Measures Taken between 15 November 2008 and 15 
June 2009  
OECD report assessing the effects of government interventions implemented globally in 
response to the GFC.   
https://ypfs.som.yale.edu/node/3107. 
298
The Rescue of the US Auto Industry, Module G Henken

--- Page 20 ---
Copyright 2022© Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to 
receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program 
on Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu.  
299
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 4 Iss. 1