--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 3 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Faith Schwartz Lessons Learned: Faith Schwartz 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale University 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Chute Lynch, Mary Anne and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2023) "Lessons Learned: Faith Schwartz," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 3, 39-41. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1519 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss3/7 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss3/7

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned  
Faith Schwartz 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
In October 2007, at the start of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), Faith Schwartz was recruited 
by the US Department of the Treasury to organize the Hope Now Alliance, a public-private part-
nership she led through 2012. Its mission was to assist homeowners  looking to modify their 
loans and avoid foreclosure. Several of the innovations and protections Hope Now implemented 
became law through the passage of the Dod d-Frank Act in 2010. In 2016, Schwartz founded 
Housing Finance Strategies and is its chief executive officer. This “Lessons Learned” is based on 
an interview held with Schwartz in November 2021; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
In a crisis, don’t overlook the possible benefits of public -private alliances. Private in-
dustry has a  wealth of knowledge that can be leveraged  to strengthen government 
programs for the public good. 
With millions of homeowners looking to modify the terms of their loans to avoid foreclosure 
during the G FC, Schwartz was asked by the George W. Bush administration to organize a  
broad coalition of lenders, loan servicers, investors, nonprofit housing counselors, and other 
industry participants to reach out to and assist borrowers. The Hope Now Alliance was a 
voluntary organization that worked to raise industry concerns, design loan modification so-
lutions, increase awareness of the program, and address infrastructure and process issues.  
According to Schwartz, the effort was challenging but ultimately successful in a number of 
ways. The biggest challenges, Schwartz said, were the diverse constituencies:  
We had investors, who wanted to be  repaid, and Congress, which was pretty much 
mad at all the banks and the nonbanks. It wasn ’t popular to be a lending institution 
during the Great Recession. We had the loan advocacy groups and civil rights groups 
that were very much advocating for the con sumer, and lenders who weren ’t used to 
having that kind of foreclosure  volume. We had this mix of people who understood 
they needed to do everything they could to minimize foreclosures at all costs. We had 
to get buy -in even from the banking and the finance industry to make sure they 
weren’t thinking about the crisis in a traditional foreclosure way. I’d say aligning and 
getting agreement on a simple task to go forward was a Herculean task.  
Schwartz focused the group on the fundamentals: “Building standards, tracking, and telling 
the public what was going on was the big push. ” Her organization helped design measure-
ments and rubrics to fill gaps in the industry. “There weren’t a lot of structural loan modifi-
cations that were available. They had to be d eveloped,” she recalled. “They were complex, 
and a very small number of people in every company understood them.” Once solutions were 
designed, they were rolled out across Hope Now’s servicers.  
39

--- Page 4 ---
After the Obama administration implemented the Home Affordable Modification  Program 
(HAMP), Hope Now worked with it to maximize solutions for homeowners. Schwart z ex-
plained: 
For instance, when [a HAMP modification] failed, we actually showed the private 
[modifications to clients] on top of HAMP, if they did not qual ify for a HAMP modifi-
cation. So many borrowers were still saved from a foreclosure with non-HAMP mods 
as a last solution to avoid foreclosure. We actually measured it both ways to show the 
totality of the situation. So that organizing, response, and slowing down of foreclosure 
was very much a success for a voluntary program. 
Even in the heat of a crisis, considering new ways of doing things might deliver better 
results.   
The housing crisis saw foreclosure rates double, triple, and even quadruple from customary 
levels. Loan servicing firms —their people and  technology—were overwhelmed , said 
Schwartz. Hope Now helped the disparate participants work together to develop feasible so-
lutions that could be applied across the industry and bring uniformity to the problem. Some 
of these had lasting impact, she noted: 
The agencies have different loss mitigation rules in place and were not aligned on 
process, so we started with the nongovernment lo ans to drive change , and the GSEs 
[government-sponsored enterprises] in particular helped us with alignment in the 
government loss mitigation processes.  The FHFA [Federal Housing Finance Agency] 
and agencies worked with us to arrive at some standard modifi cation processes, in-
cluding maximum DTIs [debt-to-income ratios] and waterfalls for the process. At the 
end, these were in place prior to the new administration coming in and adding HAMP 
to the process, which changed and subsidized the modifications . . . We [also] worked 
with the government, Treasury, to drive toward a net present value test where the 
loan servicer did not have to maximize the return to the investor , which is what pri-
vate contracts warranted. But we had to deliver a neutral outcome to the investor by 
having the borrower stay in their home at a reasonable modification that was sustain-
able. This was a breakthrough that took a long time to adopt and became standard in 
the marketplace.  
She commended the Obama administration for trying new strategies, some of which worked 
and some of which didn’t. Hope Now was able to assist in some of these efforts:   
They put a trial modification in place. It was a verbal modification, and over a number 
of months, people would come up with the documentation to go from trial modifica-
tions into permanent modifications. It’s very difficult for documentation and for com-
pliance purposes to recast mortgages without the proper paperwork in place. Overall, 
it was pretty successful, but it took months and months and months of both monitor-
ing, measuring, and getting those documents in place. Companies had conference 
rooms with thousands of people calling borrowers because they needed their docs.  
Due to investor and government require ments to avoid fraud, there was a big 
40
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
emphasis on documentation from the borrower. Due to the millions of loans, the pure 
communication of this required faxes, fed expresses, and even use of our new portal, 
HOPE LoanPort, so consumers and lenders would communicate and not lose the doc-
uments submitted via portal. Processes and systems were archaic , and just getting a 
homeowner on their own to PDF a document and upload it was difficult. 
Another area Schwartz cites as a win is communication . “It was a very dar k time,” recalled 
Schwartz. “Millions of people were at risk, and we tried to pull together fairly disciplined 
messaging, a disciplined data approach, and outreach to all the communities that were most 
at risk.” Her efforts helped spread the word about the programs and helped the administra-
tion overcome consumer reluctance.  
I wrote letters out of Hope Now that we co-branded with the Treasury seal that were 
sent out by the lender to their homeowners who were at risk. We had a pretty big 
bump in response , because the letters weren ’t coming directly from the banks like 
Wells Fargo, Chase, and Bank of America, even though these lenders would mail these 
letters on our behalf. 
While noting that regulatory changes, industry developments , and technological advances  
have resolved many of the GFC issues, Schwartz commended the government’s response to 
the COVID-19 pandemic’s housing problems. The government did a “remarkable job,” she 
said, “I don’t usually say things like that. Government isn ’t nimble, but it ’s quite impressive 
what they did.” She also noted that the government applied many of the lessons learned dur-
ing the GFC when addressing the COVID pandemic: 
The federal government and the quasi -federal government —the agencies —did a 
marvelous job in the pande mic with structuring loan modifications and hardship to 
defer the payment onto the back end and allow them to resume their payments. They 
are doing it without a lot of documentation. They’ve learned a lot of lessons from the 
Great Recession, that this is not a fraudulent issue. Let’s get borrowers back on track 
and avoid the foreclosure. We know that ’s a huge loss to the community and in our 
own insurance book of business. 
Overall, Schwartz considers the time at Hope Now as one of the highlights of her care er and 
is proud of the work the organization did to refocus industry and government on the bor-
rower. “If you keep the consumer at the center of your activity, no matter who you are or 
what you’re doing,” she said,  “you usually can come up with a better mou setrap that’s not 
going to be problematic for the borrower or the lenders.” 
Dated: November 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021-41 
41
Lessons Learned: Faith Schwartz Chute Lynch and Wiggins