--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 2 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Daleep Singh Lessons Learned: Daleep Singh 
Steven Kelly 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kelly, Steven (2023) "Lessons Learned: Daleep Singh," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 2, 20-22. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1509 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss2/6 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss2/6

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned  
Daleep Singh 
By Steven Kelly1 
Daleep Singh served as head of the Markets Group at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York  
(FRBNY) from February 2020 to February 2021. In this leading role, he helped to formulate and 
effect the Fed’s response to the COVID -19 crisis. He met with the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability (YPFS) to share insights related to the Fed’s crisis responses during the pandemic. This 
Lessons Learned is based on an interview held with Singh on November 19, 2022; the full tran-
script may be accessed here. 
Coordinated efforts, both across markets and across different  crisis-fighting bodies, 
can improve the initial impact of a given crisis intervention. 
Early in the pandemic, the Fed rolled out a number of emergency facilities to address domes-
tic markets. In parallel, on March 15, 2020, the Fed e ased the terms under its standing US 
dollar swap lines with five foreign central banks; on March 19, it effected temporary swap 
lines with nine other central banks ; and on March 31, it established a repo facility open to 
foreign central banks and monetary authorities .2 Singh said of t he coordinated timing be-
tween responding to domestic and foreign dollar markets: 
What we wanted to do was to backstop both the domestic funding markets and the 
offshore dollar funding markets at the same time. As you know, there is a global mar-
ket with demand for dollar liquidity. That’s especially true during times of stress, 
since there are at least $10 trillion in dollar liabilities held offshore. 
In addition to coordinating across markets, Singh noted there were benefits of strong coor-
dination with the Treasury Department. 3 Many of the Fed’s emergency lending programs 
leveraged funds provided by Treasury to take on more risk. Singh noted that the Fed took 
care to design its emerge ncy lending facilities with Treasury coordination in mind. He said 
moving “in lockstep” with Treasury served as a “force multiplier.” 
Singh also noted, however, that the benefits of coordination must be balanced against the 
crisis-fighting advantages of re taining flexibility. He said that despite the stronger show of 
 
1 Senior Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
2 For a complete examination of these facilities, see Hoffner, Ben. 2023. “United States: Central Bank Swaps to 
14 Countries, 2020.” Journal of Financial Crises 5, no. 1. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-finan-
cial-crises/vol5/iss1/21; and Kelly, Steven. 2023. “United States: FIMA Repo Facility, 2020. Journal of Finan-
cial Crises 5, no. 1. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss1/23 
3 Following the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 mandated that the Treasury 
secretary give prior authorization for the Fed’s use of its Section 13(3) emergency liquidity authority. Even 
though this requirement did not exist during the GFC, the relationship between the Fed and Treasury was 
highly collaborative.  
20

--- Page 4 ---
policy force, “the effort to coordinate may have slowed the pace of implementation and in-
creased the complexity of execution.” 
Retaining flexibility in emergency intervention design is crucial. Building in flexibility 
across factors such as timing, eligibility, breadth, and governance  can improve the 
nimbleness of crisis response. 
Singh described the rollout of the various interventions as “iterative to preserve optionality 
for ramp-up or refinement” after assessing the impact and lessons of the previous iteration. 
Retaining this flexibility was important with respect to limiting any  market fragmentation, 
Singh said. For instance, overly inflexible cutoffs for emergency assistance eligibility could 
risk fragmenting markets and unduly damaging those without access to the emergency back-
stops. Singh worried that any undue fragmentation could “ reignite systemic risk or impair 
credit provision for key sectors of the economy.” 
He described the Fed as thinking critically about how to retain flexibility while balancing 
governance considerations. The Fed came up with several additional policy options , should 
they be needed, some of which could be executed unilaterally by the Fed, while others would 
require a term sheet change—and thus coordination with Treasury. 
Among several examples, Singh described the Fed’s contingency planning with respect to 
one of its corporate bond purchase programs, the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facil-
ity (SMCCF)4: 
For the SMCCF, we could increase the pace of purchases—i.e., recalibrate the “market 
functioning” score—with no term sheet change needed. We could also scope in longer 
maturities (beyond five years) and/or riskier assets (lower credits), but these re-
quired a term sheet change. 
He also described the importance of flexibility with respect to the breadth of the response, 
illustrating the importance of making sure  the emergency assistance net was cast —and ac-
tually reached—wide enough while also being sensitive to sector -specific needs. On casting 
a wide enough net, Singh said: 
By routing liquidity and credit through multiple channels to multiple destinations —
households, small/midsize/large businesses, state/local governments —facilities 
have appropriately sought to backstop a broad cross-section of the economy. 
Yet, he also noted how sector-specific analysis could help fine-tune this operation and make 
for the most effective use of available firepower . He described how the Fed had considered 
adjusting intervention terms by sector. In a particularly salient example, for instance, the Fed 
excluded banks from eligibility for the SMCCF despite their large presence in the corporate 
 
4 For an examination of the SMCCF, see: Leonard, Natalie. 2022. “United States: Primary Market Corporate 
Credit Facility and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility .” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/82 
21
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
bond market  (over 20% of the US investment grade bond market at the time) . Singh de-
scribed this decision: 
We wanted to concentrate our firepower where it was most needed. We had enough 
data with the banks to know their capital and liquidity positions were solid. We knew 
there wasn’t a market functioning issue in their securities, as far as we could observe 
in terms of their ability to raise capital or for secondary market participants to trade 
their bonds.  
Of course, we wanted the banks to make l oans to the real economy and amplify the 
stimulus we were providing for that to occur. But flushing banks with even more li-
quidity when there wasn ’t a lot of credit demand was just pushing on a string. So, it 
was a better use of taxpayer resources to make targeted interventions directly into 
small businesses or municipalities. 
Even in the heat of crisis, it is important to focus on staff development and expanding 
institutional expertise. 
Singh noted how the Fed made a conscious effort to not just re -enlist the staff with crisis -
fighting experience from the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–2009, but also to institutionalize 
crisis-fighting insights/capabilities both horizontally and vertically across the organizational 
structure. Singh said: 
Throughout the process [of standing up emergency intervention facilities], we had a 
philosophical preference to not just pull the same people who were involved in the 
’08, ’09 facility execution, but also to train and breed a new generation of emergency 
facility firefighters. 
In addition to this vertical training, Singh described the socializ ation of crisis -fighting 
knowledge across the Federal Reserve System: 
We also designed a rotation of personnel off the facilities so that we could train new 
people to come on board. That created redundancy in terms of people who could ex-
ecute as the first wave needed time to recharge. We weren’t trying to create a small 
group of crisis-fighting heroes who had all the information about what to do in their 
head. We tried to document and spread the knowledge as much as possible, both to 
the New York Fed as a whole and the Federal Reserve System more broadly by pulling 
personnel from other Reserve Banks. We spent a lot of time cross-training each other, 
and we tried to have people rotat e from one facility to another so that almost every-
body knew how to contribute on any of the facilities at any particular time. 
 
Dated: August 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022-56 
22
Lessons Learned: Daleep Singh Kelly