--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 4 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Eric Rosengren Lessons Learned: Eric Rosengren 
Steven Kelly 
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kelly, Steven (2023) "Lessons Learned: Eric Rosengren," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 4, 43-45. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1527 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss4/7 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss4/7

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned  
Eric Rosengren 
By Steven Kelly1 
Eric Rosengren began working at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in 1985 and ultimately 
served as its president and CEO from 2007 to 2021, including during the Global Financial Crisis 
(GFC) and the COVID-19 crisis. He met with the Yale Program on Financial Stability  (YPFS) to 
share insights related to the Fed eral Reserve’s crisis responses—particularly those during the 
pandemic. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview conducted with Rosengren on Febru-
ary 6, 2023; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
As much as possible , having infrastructure in pla ce to quickly implement any an-
nounced program is paramount, especially when assets are being purchased. 
Crisis fighters cannot always rely on positive announcement effects in the market when roll-
ing out emergency liquidity programs—even broad-based market liquidity programs. Unlike 
many of the Fed’s other emergency liquidity programs, the Boston Fed’s Money Market Mu-
tual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF),2 an emergency facility that made nonrecourse loans to 
banks to purchase assets from money market funds, did not utilize a special purpose vehicle 
(SPV) structure, a structure that comes with operational and managerial benefits .3 Rosen-
gren noted not using the SPV structure was crucial because it is “much more cumbersome to 
negotiate” and “requires about six weeks of legal work.” 
This delay was not typically deleterious for the Fed  programs that used SPVs , as the an-
nouncement of the program alone would often be sufficient to restore market functioning in 
the targeted sector of the financial system. Yet, Rosengren delineated between programs de-
signed to address spikes in credit spreads and those that actually needed to remove assets 
from private balance sheets. With respect to the MMLF, he said: 
With the money market funds, an announcement alone doesn’t stop a run. It’s a little 
bit different than promising to purchase assets to lower the cost of funding. The 
 
1 Associate Director of Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management . 
2 The MMLF was the pandemic-era iteration of the similar Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mu-
tual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF) from the GFC. Both were run out of the Boston Fed and lent nonrecourse to 
banks against the amortized value of paper purchased from money market mutual funds. The MMLF included 
several classes of paper as eligible, whereas the AMLF was focused exclusively on asset -backed commercial 
paper. The other major, and related, difference is that the MMLF received $10 billion of loss protection from 
the US Treasury. For more, see: Mott, Carey K., and Mallory Dreyer. 2022. “United States: Money Market Mutual 
Fund Liquidity Facility.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-finan-
cial-crises/vol4/iss2/84/  
3 See: Kelly, Steven. 2023.  “Why Does the Fed Really Use SPVs?” Yale School of Management.  
https://som.yale.edu/story/2023/why-does-fed-really-use-spvs 
43

--- Page 4 ---
commercial paper facility 4 [by contrast] was basically a facility to bring in spreads. 
The money market facility was really a facility to stop a run. The motivation is a little 
bit different. I'm not sure announcement effects alone are sufficient if you're already 
experiencing a run on the asset class. 
Central bankers should be mindful of, and prepared for, cliff effects when rolling out 
emergency liquidity facilities to some markets and not others. Where uncertainties or 
legal risks remain, support from the fiscal authority becomes more crucial. 
Rosengren noted that in some cases, the Fed’s pandemic interventions adversely affect ed 
unincluded market segments, instead of providing positive spillovers. That is, when the Fed 
announced that a particular asset class was eligible for support from a Fed program, markets 
for similar assets that remained ineligible became markedly disadvantaged. Rosengren said: 
One of the complications was, as soon as we announced paper that was going to be  
accepted by the facility, people wanted to hold that paper, but not the other paper in 
their portfolio. So, we would keep getting calls to expand the size of the MMLF. It was 
somewhat cumbersome in that we kept switching which assets we were willing to 
take into the facility as people applied pressure —both at the Fed and at Treasury —
to broaden out the number of instruments that would be accepted at that  facility. It 
also became a somewhat complicated facility. 
[…] 
The broadening of the facility even got to the point of including things that I think 
initially we hadn't thought about —including the tax -exempt sector—as people be-
came worried that credit mark ets that didn't have a Fed facility backstopping them 
would be significantly disadvantaged. And the spreads were quite large relative to 
anything that qualified at the facility. 
For instance, the Fed has historically expressed legal uncertainty about being  able to inter-
vene in unsecured lending markets, absent additional loss protection.5 When the Fed opened 
the MMLF during COVID -19 crisis, it had a loss protection layer from US Treasury funding. 
This was crucial in allowing the Fed to proceed more readily into important unsecured mar-
kets without facing the same legal risks. Rosengren explained: 
 
4 This is a reference to the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), which the Fed set up during the GFC as 
well as during the pandemic in slightly modified form. The CPFF purchased commercial paper directly in the 
primary market. For more on the pandemic -era CPFF, see: Engbith, Lily S. 2022. “United States : Commercial 
Paper Funding Facility II.” Journal of Financial Crises  4, no. 2. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-fi-
nancial-crises/vol4/iss2/83/ 
5 See, for example: Federal Reserve Board of Governors Legal Division. 2009. “Authority of the Federal Reserve 
to Provide Extensions of Credit in Connection with a Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF).” Memoran-
dum, March 9, 2009. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/7915/  
44
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
Because there was Treasury funding, it gave us more flexibility not to worry about it 
being asset-backed commercial paper. That was fortunate in that asset -backed com-
mercial paper was not nearly as widely held by money markets by the time of the 
pandemic. 
Crisis fighters should consider restricting all bank capital distributions during 
periods when emergency liquidity is being provided to the banking system. 
During the pandemic, the Fed restricted banks’ share buybacks but generally did not suspend 
dividends. It also set up eight emergency liquidity programs under Section 13(3) of the 
Federal Reserve Act. Rosengren suggested that it was inconsistent to think of these  policies 
separately. Specifically, he said that the presence of central bank emergency liquidity 
facilities suggests that there is Fed concern over banks themselves providing that credit. 
Thus, Rosengren argued, not restricting all bank capital distributions only risks exacerbating 
that problem:  
My personal view is still that we should have stopped dividends as soon as we set up 
facilities. If you have a 13(3) facility, you probably don’t need to be having money go 
out the door of banks through dividends.  I think it was a mistake not to cut off 
dividends when it was determined that 13(3) facilities were actually necessary. 
 
Dated: December 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2023-09 
45
Lessons Learned:  Eric Rosengren Kelly