--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 3 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Diane Thompson Lessons Learned: Diane Thompson 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale University 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Chute Lynch, Mary Anne and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2023) "Lessons Learned: Diane Thompson," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 3, 42-45. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1520 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss3/8 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss3/8

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned  
Diane Thompson 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Diane Thompson was of counsel at the National Consumer Law Center from 2006 to 2014, con-
ducting policy advocacy on legal issues affecting low-income consumers during the housing cri-
sis. Subsequently, she joined the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), where she 
led the development of and provided guidance on federal consumer regulations in the areas of 
mortgage, fair lending, debt collection, credit reporting, and student loan servicing. She cur-
rently leads the Consumer Rights Regulatory Engagement and Advocacy Project, which she 
founded in 2020 to promote inclusive public engagement in regulatory work, particularly for 
low-income communities and communities of color and since 2021 has been senior adviser to 
the director of the CFPB. This “Lessons Learned” is based on an interview with Thompson held 
in September 2021; the full transcript may be accessed here.  
Diverse viewpoints and opinions can fuel more effective crisis -fighting policies that 
better consider the impacts on individuals and communities as well as corporations. 
As a consumer advocate, Thompson has scrutinized the government’s c risis response from 
a viewpoint not often heard in discussions: that of individual homeowners and especially 
those from low-income communities and communities of color. She finds little fault with the 
government’s spending on assisting large financial corporations. However, from her vantage 
point, the government’s response was hobbled by its limited perspective. Other looming 
threats just as potentially dangerous as the buildup of risk and toxic assets in the large 
banks—the systemic infiltration of predato ry practice into mainstream financial products 
and securities—were overlooked and minimized because of a certain myopia on the part of 
policymakers:  
Certainly, by 2000, many of us were ringing alarm bells at the Fed [eral Reserve] and 
saying, “We’re seeing this happen in communities all across the country. There’s no 
way this is sustainable. These loans are getting packaged and sold on Wall Street. 
They’re in people’s retirement accounts. This could create systemic risk.” What we 
were consistently told by people at the Fed and other regulators is, “The problems of 
your clients will never lead to a national crisis. They’re not big enough; they’re not 
important enough; they’re not systemic.”  
[. . . ] I do think that there was a bit o f an echo chamber effect. The regulators largely 
are thinking about what’s happening on Wall Street and in big financial firms and con-
tinued to think that the problems of the economy were really the problems of Wall 
Street firms and not of Main Street and communities across the country.  
“Often, even when we think we’re being impartial,” said Thompson, “we’re discounting some 
people’s experiences and elevating and prioritizing others.” The Fed and other policymakers 
thought that the foreclosure issues couldn’t imperil the larger economy, Thompson said; his-
tory proved them wrong. 
42

--- Page 4 ---
Given how interconnected the economic system is, said Thompson, policymakers must look 
past their biases and seek a variety of voices to ensure that all possibilities are examined and 
none are dismissed outright. Said Thompson, “to act quickly [in a crisis], you need to be tak-
ing in real -time information, and you need to be looking at it with an unjaundiced and im-
partial eye. The data says what the data says, and you shouldn ’t view it through the lens of 
whatever your particular biases are.” She further explained:  
Had policymakers been more able, more willing to recognize that their own experi-
ences were limited and biased, and that there were other experiences that were very 
different, that reflected real risk, I think they would have been able to and motivated 
to act much more quickly . . . If we do market monitoring, and we think about what is 
happening in all our communities—where are the risks, how is that happening, is that 
what we expect, is that what we want, what are the downstream consequences?—we 
are then well-positioned to intervene in a timely and effective way.  
Crisis responses for corporations and individuals should be fair and equitable, based 
on impartial and rational standards. 
Another issue Thompson criticized was the seemingly different standard of review policy-
makers applied to assistance provided to corporations and to individuals: 
There was a widespread belief that doing anything to relieve homeowners would cre-
ate significant moral hazard , while at the same  time there was virtually no concern 
about moral hazard for bailouts for large institutions. It was a striking example of “us-
them” thinking. People defaulting on the loans were presumed to somehow be mor-
ally deficient, less deserving than people running investment companies and needing 
bailouts. I think that has to do with whom people knew, whom they were accustomed 
to thinking about. 
Thompson doesn’t argue that moral hazard and risk of fraud are valid concerns for any in-
tervention or government program. However, these issues should be addressed based on 
objective and equitable standards rather than bias:  
That ties into the moral hazard and the moral framework around the deserving needy 
and fraud. We need to apply the same standards to individual s that we apply to cor-
porations. If we’re willing to tolerate a risk of fraud when we give a bailout to a cor-
porate entity or risk of moral hazard when we give a bailout to corporations, we 
should be willing to take on at least as much risk with individual s. We should be as 
rational in how we provide aid to individual households and families as we are in how 
we provide aid to corporations. We ’re making decisions based on what we think the 
economic incentives are, what the needs are, what aligns with what ou r policy goals 
are. We don ’t require many certifications of heads of business showing they really 
need the money, and we don’t make them document it three or six different ways. We 
do it fast and simple because we don ’t want to waste people ’s time and mone y. We 
don’t do that with individuals. And that insistence on doing individualized, one -off 
43
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
assistance and not quickly and efficiently pumping the money out was a huge part of 
the failure of HAMP [the Home Affordable Modification Program]. 
To Thompson’s mind, this kind of double standard might have caused the less than effective 
structure of the Treasury Department’s HAMP, which was designed to assist homeowners in 
modifying their troublesome mortgages, but which was perceived by many commentators 
as not easy for homeowners to access. 
Even in the heat of a crisis, the practical aspects of interventions need to be scruti-
nized, and it might make sense to consider new ways of doing things to enhance re-
sults.  
A year after the government created HAMP, Thompson wrote a detailed testimony to the US 
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs describing the inefficiencies in the 
government’s flagship program for homeowners, which was voluntary. Then as now, 
Thompson saw HAMP as a program without the right incentives and with infrastructure 
poorly suited to it s task. It was difficult to get servicers to participate in the program , she 
noted:  
There were very small incentives to comply with the program. There remained sig-
nificant hurdles to comply. One of the significant problems is that default servicing 
has never been a moneymaker. Service rs don’t get additional money for doing good 
default servicing. Investors were willing to tolerate poor default servicing, because 
overall they were worried about moral hazard , and that homeowners would try to 
defraud them if given a chance. They believed  that, over time, it would be better for 
them if servicers push people out the door. 
The program was set up very quickly, in the middle of the crisis , and relied on mortgage 
servicers to do the modifications. But, in Thompson’s opinion, the Treasury Department did 
not adequately consider how the program would fit into mortgage servicers’ normal activi-
ties and whether they had the necessary expert personnel or technology to operationalize it. 
She also pointed out that there were significant structural problems in the design of HAMP. 
Modifications had never been done on such a large scale before , said Thompson. T he pro-
gram basically tried to utilize a decentralized manual process run on older technology to 
address a systemic issue of massive scale.  
It was incredibly costly to do proper default mortgage servicing.  Before the crisis, 
mods [modifications] had always been a one -off deal that you negotiate one -on-one 
with the servicer. That’s not a system that’s going to work when you have millions of 
people all at one time facing foreclosure. You’ve got to get more automation. 
Although the Treasury reports that more than 5 million homeowners received modifications, 
many commentators, like Thompson, consider the program to have been less than a success 
and to have helped far too few.  
  
44
Lessons Learned: Diane Thompson Chute Lynch and Wiggins

--- Page 6 ---
Dated: November 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021-37 
45
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 3