--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 2 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Kenneth Feinberg Lessons Learned: Kenneth Feinberg 
Yasemin Sim Esmen 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Esmen, Yasemin Sim (2023) "Lessons Learned: Kenneth Feinberg," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 
2, 1-2. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1504 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss2/1 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss2/1

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
 
Kenneth Feinberg 
By Yasemin Sim Esmen 
Kenneth Feinberg  was special master for Troubled Assets Relief Program ( TARP) executive 
compensation at the US Department of the Treasury during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). 
He was tasked with overseeing the revision of executive payments at companies that received 
exceptional assistance from the government  during the crisis. For four decades, Feinberg has 
managed victim compensations for major catastrophes , including mediating resolution of 
Agent Orange claims and serving as special master of the September 11th Victim Compensation 
Fund; recently, he was hired by the Justice Department to oversee the $500 million 737 Max 
Victims Fund allocated for the families of those killed in the two crashes involving Boeing 737s. 
This Lessons Learned is based on an interview held with Feinberg on March 11, 2021 ; the full 
transcript may be accessed here.  
When companies are receiving large amounts of government funding, it may be more 
acceptable to place limits on excessive executive compensation to protect the public’s 
interests. 
The law that created the Treasury oversight of executive compensation in the seven 
companies that received exceptional assistance under the Troubled Asset s Relief Program 
(TARP) was unique. The whole point of the TARP executive compensation program was to 
protect the public’s interest , explained Feinberg. “When you provide massive taxpayer 
money to assist companies so that they can survive, the idea that on a parallel track these 
companies were providing huge amounts of immediate cash compensation to executives 
caused a real political firestorm in the Congress,” he said. The Wall Street versus Main Street 
debates that proliferated during the period  made it clear that the firestorm had quickly 
spread beyond Washington. 
When the government provided financial assistance and effectively became a  significant 
creditor of the  several companies that received exceptional TARP assistance , Congress 
decided that it should have a s ay in the executive compensation paid at those companies . 
Once the companies paid back the funds from the government, the TARP  compensation 
restrictions went away. According to Feinberg, that’s how it should be; he does not think this 
program is likely to be, or should be, replicated or expanded outside the extraordinary 
conditions that generated it:   
The federal government should not be in the business of regulating private corporate 
compensation. I do not think the Founding Fathers or policy makers today think that 
it is wise or beneficial for this strong arm of the federal government and the 
Department of the Tre asury to impose its principles and its scriptures on private 
compensation and private companies. 
When designing an executive compensation structure, it is important to make sure 
executives have “skin in the game.”  
1

--- Page 4 ---
Executive compensation at companies that received exceptional assistance from the TARP 
was generally structured in a way that gave the executives large sums of guaranteed, 
immediately available cash. This shielded them from much of the risk that their companies 
were taking on, said Feinberg, risk  that investors and now the public were having to 
shoulder, which created a very unfair situation. Feinberg said, 
. . .  at a time of great financial uncertainty, the idea that executives were protected 
from the fluctuations of the marketplace by hard cash was also a convenient way for 
executives to balance cash, stock, and other payments by getting the bulk of their 
compensation in cash and not having to worry about the fluctuations in the 
marketplace when it came to stock. 
Although each company had different rationalizations, Feinberg easily identified one 
common reason for the way executive compensations were structured: 
I think that the reason  there was not more skin in the game was because in the 
competitive private marketplace, maintaining executive loyalty to a company 
required immediate financial gratification, not long-term success. 
While establishing the TARP executive compensation program, Feinberg had to address the 
concern that executives  whose compens ation was being restructured would leave the ir 
companies, causing firms to lose top talent at a time when they were most needed. Feinberg 
did not agree. 
I never believed it, it was never demonstrated that would be the case, and it did not 
turn out to be the case.  
What I did try and do, during my tenure at the Treasury Department, was to come up 
with a balanced compensation formula, a balanced structure that would maintain 
executive loyalty within reason, while at the same time tie that loyalty and that 
executive’s ultimate compensation to long-term, not short-term, company growth as 
reflected in stocks and other forms of compensation. 
There was also a focus on curbing what were viewed as outlandish perks paid by a 
company—“preventing officials from joining country clubs or taking private planes while the 
company was still dependent on public taxpayer support. ” However, according to Feinberg, 
“the key to the program was better aligning executive compensation to longer-term company 
performance.” 
Dated: August 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021–14 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 2