--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 3 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Neil Barofsky Lessons Learned: Neil Barofsky 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2023) "Lessons Learned: Neil Barofsky," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 3, 
23-26. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1514 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss3/2 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss3/2

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned  
Neil Barofsky 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Neil Barofsky served as the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program 
(SIGTARP) from 2009 until 2011. Barofsky, a former prosecutor, established and supervised the 
audit division that monitored the financial assistance provided as part of the $700 billion TARP. 
This “Lessons Learned” is based on an interview with Mr. Barofsky in September 2021 ; the full 
transcript may be accessed here.  
For any program like TARP to have the impact that Congress intended, the adminis-
tering agencies must completely understand Congress ’s intent and care about imple-
menting it. 
TARP was adopted to stabilize the financial system so as to protect home values and savings 
and to preserve homeownership, jobs, and economic growth. The extension of credit, includ-
ing lending to homeowners and small businesses, had been severely restricted before TARP’s 
adoption. Stabilizing the banks’ capital positions was intended to restart the flow of credit to 
help homeowners refinance and modify mortgages and avoid foreclosure , as well as to re-
start lending to small business. 
The role of the SIGTARP, similar to that of any inspector general (IG), was to ensure that the 
administration and Treasury were using the TARP funds as intended by Congress and to pre-
vent fraud. On this score, Barofsky counts one failure and one success. 
Well, TARP was supposed to do two things. And I don ’t know if I would say that one 
was primary and one was secondary. That bill does not pass Congress, Treasury does 
not get that $700 billion, but for its commitment to not just help the banks, but to help 
people. I put the two goals on the same plane. 
“It got an A+ by saving the banks,” according to Barofsky. But he considers this only a partial 
success. “People say: ‘Wasn't TARP a ringing success? ’ No, TARP was not a success, TARP 
was a failure, because TARP failed to do one of its primary goals, which was to help home-
owners and restore lending to small businesses.” 
According to Barofsky , when the administration and Treasury shifted gears from buying 
toxic assets (bad mortgages) to investing in the large Wall Street banks to stabilize them , it 
jeopardized TARP’s other goal . The problem, said Barofsky, was that when the money was 
distributed to the banks , necessary precautions were not taken to ensure it would be used 
as intended:  
When they gave the money to the banks, they didn ’t put any requirements or incen-
tives for them [to help homeowners and smal l businesses]. Zero. And so, what hap-
pened, none of the money that went to the banks went to help small businesses or 
homeowners. [In effect,] zero matchup of what you want and what actually happens. 
23

--- Page 4 ---
In practice, the banks used the funds to stabilize operations, acquire other distressed insti-
tutions, and address other operational goals while tightening credit. In that respect, the 
TARP was a failure, said Barofsky, because it did not achieve one of the goals stated by Con-
gress, even though it did succeed in stabilizing the banks.  
Barofsky asserted that m any regulators retroactively and falsely have rewritten history to 
claim the TARP’s focus was only to stabilize the financial system and not forestall the fore-
closure crisis. Officials in Washington failed homeowners , he said, because they didn’t have 
sympathy or empathy with the households losing their homes; they didn’t know any of them, 
so it was easy to picture them as irresponsible people who got in  over their heads and de-
served to be foreclosed. That was the basis of many “moral hazard” arguments raised by of-
ficials and regulators with respect to mortgage assistance for homeowners.  
In Barofsky’s view, that approach evolved into the narrative that the government bailed out 
the banks and left the people adrift, leading to growth of movements such as Occupy Wall 
Street and the rise of populism, which have had broad and long-lasting impacts on the coun-
try. Barofsky explained:  
I think if they [government officials] had a more people -focused approach that took 
the responsibility to help struggling homeowners and put that on par with their pas-
sion for rescuing the biggest banks, we wouldn ’t have seen t he transformation, the 
political results that resulted in the election of President [Donald] Trump. I put that 
squarely on [the administration and the Treasury Department ’s] doorstep for those 
decisions. 
Despite his dour view on the success of the TARP in achieving its goals, Barofsky does believe 
the SIGTARP office was able to have do a “very, very effective job of limiting losses to fraud” 
under the program. The office did this by being tenacious and  by relying on the bipartisan 
support that backed its efforts. “Even our harshest critics, including both secretaries of 
Treasury that I worked with, Paulson and Geithner, both acknowledged we did a very good 
job of deterring people from taking advantage of the program, of committing fraud ,” said 
Barofsky. 
Effective independent oversight requires bipartisan support to succeed.  
Arriving in Washington with no previous experience, Barofsky consulted with other inspec-
tors general, who often told him there are three kinds of IGs: lapdogs, watchdogs , and junk-
yard dogs. The first one cozies up to power and is ineffectual, while the third one tears eve-
rything down. A watchdog, the trope concludes, is somewhere in between the two. The ex-
ception to that advice was the IG at the Housing Department, Ken Donohu e, who told 
Barofsky not to be afraid to use his authority like a junkyard dog to get the job done.  
This is a common problem of oversight, said Barofsky. Many IGs in Washington fail as watch-
dogs because they fear the people they are meant to police. Barof sky noted that President 
Trump fired IGs who disagreed with him during his administration:  
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
I lived in constant fear of being fired. And I had other IGs come up to me and say to 
me, “Neil, I really admire what you’re doing. I wish I could do that, but I can’t, because 
I’ve got kids who are going to college, and I need this job and I can’t afford to take that 
risk of getting fired.” I get that. 
Using their platform to make issues public is a powerful tool for IGs, but only if they have 
bipartisan support, Barofsky explained:  
One time I had a meeting with the assistant secretary who was responsible for TARP. 
His name was Herbert Allison, and he was complaining to me about one of my reports 
and the fact that I spoke about it publicly in Congress and gave an interview on cable 
television. I said to him: “This is what I do. I ’m not in the room with you. When you 
guys are deciding what to do, when you ’re making the plans, you don ’t invite me to 
those rooms, into that room for that decision-making. I’ve got to do whatever I can to 
try to influence and protect taxpayers and protect these programs. And for me, that 
means I’ve got to go to Congress. And for me to get Congress to pay attention, some-
times I’ve got to go on TV. And that’s the reality.” In other words, since I wasn’t in the 
room where the decisions were made, I went on TV so that Congress would pressure 
the administration to pay attention to our concerns.  Herb’s response was: “You may 
not be in the room, but your voice is heard. In fact, your voice is probably the biggest 
voice in there as we ’re making these decisions. ” It is how an inspector general can 
have an impact. 
But at the end of the end of the day, said Barofsky, administrations need to listen to IGs, and 
that can only happen with bipartisan congressional support. Barofsky said his office was able 
to operate and actually accomplish some things because Congress was united in trying to 
stave off the crisis. He noted: 
That s ounds like a “unicorn” in 2021 . Bipartisan congressional sup port for some-
thing? But it was a different time, and we did. That really made all the difference in 
the world.  
Look, there was nothing particularly intimidating about me and my deputy, Kevin Pu-
valowski, as we demanded the documents and pointed to the statute and said that we 
needed this material. We were pretty easy to say no to. But we carried the cudgel of 
being able to go to the chairs of the committees that oversaw those agencies. So 
whether it was Senator Max Baucus, who at the time was the head of the finance com-
mittee, which had oversight over Treasury; whether it was Senator [Chris] Dodd or 
Representative Barney Frank, who had oversight over banking and financial services, 
they had our back. 
Unfortunately, Barofsky said, the experience of the Specia l Inspector General for Pandemic 
Recovery (SIGPR) shows the lessons of 2008 were not applied when developing the response 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. Lacking bipartisanship, SIGPR didn ’t get the congressional sup-
port the office needed, and the Treasury Department decimated its jurisdiction. “I wish them 
the best, ” Barofsky commented, “because they have an important role to fulfill, but the 
25
Lessons Learned: Neil Barofsky Cardona

--- Page 6 ---
mandate has been whittled down pretty significantly. I think that agency is in a very, ver y 
difficult spot.” To make IGs truly independent, said Barofsky, Congress would need to act, 
and that would require bipartisan support. He asserts that statutes should provide that IGs 
can only be fired with cause and should mandate better mechanisms to make sure they can 
get the materials and documents they need.  
The wrong balance  of the speed of distribution against the ease of use of a program 
can result in misdirection of funds and increased fraud. 
Speeding the delivery of  funds to stave off a crisis c an be at odds with establishing strong 
oversight, said Barofsky, and in some measures can be understandable . But, he caution ed, 
without some guardrails, money is not only lost to fraud, but it may also be misdirected. He 
pointed to the banks’ lack of direction for use of hundreds of billions of TARP funds. He thinks 
that a similar miscalculation was done with the CARES Act ’s Paycheck Protection Program, 
designed to deliver funds meant to encourage businesses to retain employees during the 
quarantine shutdown. The same dynamics seen in TARP in 2009 replayed in 2020, Barofsky 
explained:  
They just did it again. They shoveled all this money out, and they gave it to the banks 
who were responsible for distributing it, but they didn ’t give them any incentives or 
requirements to direct it to the truly needy small businesses, the minority -owned 
businesses, the women-owned businesses, the true mom-and-pop stores, nothing. In-
stead, they said, “go and give this money out.” And because it was a limited amount of 
money, the banks—and I don’t fault the banks for this, to be honest with you —they 
gave it to their biggest customers, who technically qualified, whom they already had 
onboarded and already had relationships with. Because, frankly, that was the cheap-
est, easiest way to distribute the money. But as a result, a lot of those underbanked, 
traditionally mom -and-pop, traditionally Black -owned businesses, women -owned 
businesses got left behind. That was just a complete repeat of the mistakes that were 
made during TARP that were ignored here. 
Barofsky cautioned that the banks need clear directives and credible incentives to force them 
into distributing taxpayer funds in a manner consistent with the congressional intent em-
bodied in the legislation. Even given the dire circumstances of the C OVID pandemic, he 
pointed out, there were options between the loose applic ation process that was used and a 
totally strict, time-consuming one. Administrators could have thought through the balance 
more carefully. 
Dated: November 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021-25 
26
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 3