--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 1 
2023 
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of 
US Financial Assets US Financial Assets 
David M. Arseneau 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
Grace Brang 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
Matt Darst 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
Jacob M. Faber 
Columbia Business School 
David E. Rappoport 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
See next page for additional authors 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Arseneau, David M.; Brang, Grace; Darst, Matt; Faber, Jacob M.; Rappoport, David E.; and Vardoulakis, 
Alexandros P. (2023) "A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial 
Assets," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 1, 1-24. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1479 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss1/1 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial 
Assets Assets 
Authors Authors 
David M. Arseneau, Grace Brang, Matt Darst, Jacob M. Faber, David E. Rappoport, and Alexandros P. 
Vardoulakis 
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol5/iss1/1

--- Page 3 ---
A Macroprudential Perspective on  
the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets1 
David M. Arseneau, 2 Grace Brang, 3 Matt Darst, 4 Jacob M. Faber, 5  
David E. Rappoport, 6 and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis7 
Abstract 
This paper uses data from the Financial Accounts of the United States to map out the 
regulatory boundaries of assets held by US financial institutions from a macroprudential 
perspective. We provide a quantitative m easure of the macroprudential regulatory 
boundary—the perimeter between the part of the financial sector that is subject to some 
form of macroprudential regulatory oversight and that which is not —and show how it has 
evolved over the past 40 years. Additionally, we measure the boundaries between different 
regulatory agencies and financial institutions that operate within the regulatory perimeter 
and illustrate how these boundaries potentially become blurred in the face of regulatory 
overlap. Quantifying the macroprudential regulatory boundary and the boundaries for 
different regulators within the perimeter is informative for assessing financial stability 
risks over the credit cycle. 
Keywords: boundary problem, financial institutions, regulation, regulatory reach 
JEL Classifications: E58, G18, G28 
  
 
1 We thank Elizabeth Holmquist for expert advice on the Financial Accounts of the Uni ted States as well as for 
her comments on the paper , and Eduardo Davila, Elizabeth Klee, Juan Antonio Montecinos (discussant), Joe 
Stiglitz, and seminar participants at  the Hewlett-IPD seminar series on Macro/Finance and Social Welfare for 
valuable comments and suggestions. We also thank Matt Hoops for technical assistance with the data, Tristan 
D’Orsaneo, Jacob Fahringer, and DeShawn Vaugh an for research assistance , and Bohan Wang for editing 
assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those 
of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors or anyone in the Federal Reserve System.  
2 David M. Arseneau, Assistant Director , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
david.m.arseneau@frb.gov. 
3 Grace Brang, Financial Analyst, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, grace.b.brang@frb.gov. 
4 Matt Darst, Principal Economist, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, matt.darst@frb.gov. 
5 Jacob M. Faber, PhD Student, Columbia Business School, jfaber27@gsb.columbia.edu.  
6 David E. Rappoport , Principal Economist , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 
david.e.rappoport@frb.gov. 
7 Alexandros P. Vardoulakis , Chief, Economic Section , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , 
alexandros.vardoulakis@frb.gov. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction 
The movement of financial activity between the regulated and the unregulated sector s has 
important implications for financial stability. Goodhart (2008) and Goodhart and Lastra 
(2010) argue that effective regulation reduces the return on capital for regulated financial 
entities relative to those that do not face regulation.  A natural cons equence is a shift in 
financial activity into the more profitable unregulated sector. Goodhart (2008) refers to 
this as the “boundary problem” because effective regulation results in leakage that can 
worsen the procyclicality of the credit cycle and has th e potential to increase financial 
instability.8 For example, in the run -up to the Global Financial Crisis  (GFC) of 2007 –09, 
regulated entities circumvented regulatory boundaries by increasing off -balance-sheet 
activities to boost exposure to more profitable activity in the unregulated sector , and these 
activities ended up being at the heart of the ensuing crisis (Acharya , Schnabl, an d Suarez 
2013). 
The purpose of this paper is to provide quantitative measurement of the regulatory 
boundary from a macroprudential perspective and illustrate how this measurement can be 
informative for assessing financial stability risks. We use publicly available data from the 
Financial Accounts of the United States to trace out the macroprudential regulatory 
boundary o f US financial assets; that is, the perimeter between assets held by financial 
institutions that are subject to some form of macroprudential regulatory oversight versus 
holdings of those that are not. We then step inside the regulatory perimeter to assess the 
boundaries between different regulators that oversee various macroprudentially regulated 
financial institutions. Long -run trends in both the size of the regulatory boundary and the 
scope of different regulators within the boundary offer insights into h ow financial 
development has shaped the regulatory landscape, and vice versa, over the past 40 years. 
At the same time, the cyclical component of the regulatory boundary offers useful insights 
into the state of the credit cycle. 
The main contribution of th is work is the empirical measurement of the reach of various 
macroprudential regulators, including the Federal Reserve, over the US financial system. To 
our knowledge, this type of measurement has not been done elsewhere in the literature, 
but doing so is of interest to policymakers, the legal community, and academics working on 
the effects of financial regulation. It is essential, for example, for understanding how the 
regulatory reach of various macroprudential regulators has changed both cyclically as we ll 
as over the longer term as the structure of the financial economy evolves. Finally, while our 
contribution is narrowly focused on measurement, we want to be clear that we are not 
making any causal claims about what drives the regulatory and/or credit cy cle, nor do we 
make causal claims about how the two may coevolve.  
 
8 See Aiyar, Calomiris, and Wieladek  (2014) for empirical evidence on leakage of financial activity outside the 
regulated financial system following a change in regulation in the U nited Kingdom. 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
In terms of long -run developments, we document the gradual expansion of the 
macroprudential regulatory boundary over the past 40 years. Our measurement exercise 
shows the share of assets he ld by macroprudentially regulated financial institutions 
relative to total assets —a proxy for the macroprudential regulatory boundary —increased 
steadily over this period, rising from roughly 65 % in the early 1980s to about 75 % in the 
most recent data. There were important compositional changes to the boundaries between 
different regulators over this period. Rapid expansion of intermediation outside the 
traditional banking system has reduced the regulatory footprint for federal banking 
regulators, including the Federal Reserve, relative to other agencies. In contrast, the 
regulatory reach of the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC) and the Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission ( CFTC) has expanded, as assets held by nonbank financial 
intermediaries now constitute a larger fraction of total assets in the financial sector.  
This compositional shift has two important implications for macroprudential policy. First, 
the main macroprudential tools available in the US that can be deployed over the cycle are 
bank st ress tests and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). Both tools are under the 
purview of federal banking regulators and operate through bank holding companies  
(BHCs). Our measurement exercise suggests that, taken together, these tools reach only 
about one-third of all macroprudentially regulated assets, and this estimate leaves aside 
assets held on the balance sheet s of financial institutions outside the regulatory boundary. 
As long as macroprudential tools are limited to implementation through the ban king 
sector, their reach will be restricted. This is even more so as market -based financial 
intermediation plays a larger role in financial activity going forward.  
The second implication comes from the fact that both the SEC and the CFTC tend to engage 
more actively in the regulation of market activity rather than direct regulation of the 
institutions that participate in those markets. As a result, the growing regulatory footprint 
of these two agencies over the past 20 years places increasing importance on  market 
monitoring and regulation as opposed to monitoring and regulation from an institutional 
perspective. 
Turning to the cyclical component, we show that the credit expansion in the mid -1980s 
occurred alongside a cyclical expansion of the regulatory boundary. In contrast, the opposite 
is true of the expansion of credit going into the GFC as institutions that were outside the 
reach of macroprudential regulators played a larger role in credit intermediation. A lesson to 
take from this is that tracking flows of financial assets across the regulatory boundary is 
informative to assessing financial risks over the credit cycle. In particular, our exercise sheds 
light on the fact that inflows into the regulated sector in the credit expansion of the mid -
1980s were driven by institutions that, at least in principle, were more resilient in their 
ability to withstand financial stress owing to some form of macroprudential supervision. 
However, the opposite was true going into the GFC. 
From a financial stability monitoring perspective, expansions of the credit cycle that are 
concurrent with a cyclical de cline in the regulatory perimeter are of particular concern as 
3
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 6 ---
this is an indicator that credit growth is concentrated among the least resilient institutions. 
Cast in this light, tracking the expansion of flows into the unregulated sector during the 
credit boom might have acted as a warning sign pointing to increased fragility in the 
financial system. 
Beyond financial stability monitoring, measuring boundaries is useful because it gives a 
better sense of “who regulates whom.” Given the overall complexity of  financial regulation 
in the US, such an understanding may be critically important for effective communication 
with the public regarding macroprudential policy goals. Measuring boundaries helps to 
define ex ante responsibility and promotes ex post accounta bility. This seems particularly 
important for central banks. In many countries, including the US, central banks are often 
heavily relied upon to identify emerging vulnerabilities but are limited in their ability to 
implement policies to address these vulne rabilities. Our attempt to quantify the regulatory 
reach of specific macroprudential regulators allows for better understanding of the point of 
entry for regulatory action for specific regulators, including the Federal Reserve. It also 
highlights the neces sity of cooperation across different regulatory agencies to achieve 
macroprudential goals. 
From a legal perspective, quantifying regulatory boundaries gives a better sense of how 
financial innovation might change the regulatory landscape going forward. Cur rently, one 
such development is “fintech ,” which facilitates increasing engagement of nonfinancial 
businesses in financial activity. For example, technology firms are engaging in partnerships 
(or merging) with banks to offer financial services that allow b anks to step outside the 
bounds of regulation in new ways. In addition, the rapid growth and fragility of crypto  
assets ha ve drawn recent scrutiny from lawmakers regarding how to regulate this new 
industry. This paper can help put the effect of these innov ations on the regulatory 
boundary in a broader context. 
Finally, from an academic perspective, our measurement exercise can inform researchers 
building quantitative models of financial intermediation. Examples of the types of papers 
we have in mind include  Begenau and Landvoigt ( 2022); Clerc et al. (2015) ; Crouzet 
(2018); Fève, Moura, and Pierrard  (2019); Fiore and Uhlig (2011, 2015) ; Gertler, Kiyotaki, 
and Prestipino (2016); Meeks, Nelson, and Alessandri (2017); Mendicino et al. (2018); and 
Moreira and Sav ov (2017), among others. In the context of these paper s, our exercise 
suggests the basic bank versus nonbank dichotomy, while certainly informative, is only a 
small part of a much larger picture. Migration also happens between different financial 
institutions that operate within the regulatory boundary , and these institutions have 
different risk exposures and face differing degrees of regulatory scrutiny. All of this has 
implications for the implementation and effectiveness of macroprudential policy and is 
something researchers should take into account in macroeconomic models of financial 
regulation. This work also has implications for understanding the value of coordinated 
macroprudential policy implemented in a fractionalized regulatory environment such as  
the United States. 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the data 
and methodology used to separate total US financial assets into different regulatory and 
institutional bins. Section III presents our measurement r esults. Section IV discusses some 
limitations of our methodology and, finally, Section V concludes.  
II. Data and Methodology 
All data come from the Financial Accounts of the United States. The frequency is quarterly, 
and they cover the period from Q1 1980 to Q2 2022. 
Macroprudential policy aims to reduce systemic risk —the risk of widespread disruption to 
the provision of financi al services that can negatively impact the real economy (IMF -FSB-
BIS 2016). In the US, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) is the main 
cooperative body responsible for identifying systemic risks and implementing 
macroprudential policy, so for the purposes of this paper , we consider the federal financial 
regulators and state regulators that are members of FSOC that have a prudential (or safety 
and soundness) mandate as macroprudential regulators.9  
Figure 1 provides an overview of the types of financial institutions reported in the 
Financial Accounts of the United States (first column), as well as their regulatory status 
(second column) and broad institutional category (third column). We focus on assets held 
by the financial sector and, as such,  do not report the assets held by the household sector , 
nonfinancial corporate and noncorporate businesses , state and local governments , the 
federal government, the monetary authority, and entities not residing in the United States. 
As discussed in Section  IV, hedge funds, private equity firms, and central counterparty  
(CCP) clearinghouses are not included in our data because the Financial Accounts have only 
very recently started publishing information for some of these institutions separately. 
To gauge the  scope of macroprudential regulation in the US financial system, we break 
down total financial assets in the US economy according to the regulatory status of the 
holder of those assets according to the Financial Accounts; that is, whether the financial 
entities that hold the assets are macroprudentially regulated and, if so, by which agency. As 
shown in the second column of the table, each financial entity from the Financial Accounts 
(in the first column) fall s into one of three mutually exclusive categorie s: (1) those entities 
prudentially regulated by a federal banking agency, including the Federal Reserve, the 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC), or the National Credit Union Administration (NCU A);10 (2) those macroprudentially 
 
9 This definition effectively excludes the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), which is a member of 
FSOC but has a consumer protection mandate. 
10 We include in this regulatory status nonbank systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) 
designated by the US Department of the Treasury, which as such fall under the regulatory purview of the 
5
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 8 ---
regulated by agencies other than a federal banking agency, including securities market 
regulators such as the SEC and CFTC, as well as state insurance regulators and the 
regulators of government -sponsored enterprises (GSEs ), including the Federal Housing 
Finance Agency (FHFA) and the Farm Credit Administration (FCA); and finally, (3) entities 
that are not macroprudentially regulated, which includes self -regulated organizations or 
institutions that have only aspects of consumer or investor protection.  
This regulatory perspective of the data is useful for quantitatively assessing the regulatory 
boundary—or the perimeter between assets held by those institutions that are subject to 
some form of macroprudential regulation and those that are not. 
A different cut of the data breaks out total assets held by financial institutions by the broad 
nature of the activities or business model of those institutions. As shown in the third 
column of the table, we break financial institutions into five mutually exclusive categories: 
(1) depository institutions (DIs) , (2) insurance companies (ICs) , (3) pension funds (PFs) , 
(4) government-sponsored enterprises, and (5) other financial intermediaries (OFIs). OFIs 
comprise a variety of other institutions including investment funds ( for example, bond and 
equity mutual funds and exchange -traded funds), broker -dealers, finance companies, real 
estate investment trusts (RE ITs), and shell vehicles used in structured finance (asset -
backed securities issuers). 
 
Federal Reserve. See https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-markets-financial-institutions-and-
fiscal-service/fsoc/designations. 
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1: Financial Institutions, by Regulatory Status and Institutional Category 
Financial 
Institution 
Regulatory 
Status 
Institutional 
Category a 
US-chartered depository institutions b Federal banking agencies DIs 
Foreign bank offices in the US c Federal banking agencies DIs 
Holding companies Federal banking agencies DIs 
Banks in US-affiliated areas Federal banking agencies DIs 
Nonbank SIFIs a Federal Reserve ICs, OFIs 
Credit unions Other agency regulated DIs 
Property–casualty insurance companies Other agency regulated ICs 
Life insurance companies d Other agency regulated ICs 
Money market mutual funds Other agency regulated OFIs 
Investment funds e Other agency regulated OFIs 
Brokers and dealers d Other agency regulated OFIs 
Government-sponsored enterprises Other agency regulated GSEs 
Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools Other agency regulated GSEs 
Structured finance vehicles (since 2017)g Other agency regulated OFIs 
Private pension funds Not macroprudentially regulated f PFs 
State and local gov’t retirement funds Not macroprudentially regulated f PFs 
Federal government retirement funds Not macroprudentially regulated f PFs 
Finance companies Not macroprudentially regulated f OFIs 
REITs Not macroprudentially regulated f OFIs 
Funding corporations Not macroprudentially regulated f OFIs 
 
a DIs: depository institutions; ICs: insurance companies; PFs: pension funds; OFIs: other financial 
intermediaries; GSEs: government-sponsored enterprises ; SIFIs: systemically important financial 
institutions. 
b US-chartered depository institutions include institutions that are not directly regulated by the Federal 
Reserve but may be part of a BHC or a savings and loan bank holding company, such as national bank s 
(regulated by the OCC), state -chartered nonmember banks (regulated by the FDIC), federal savings 
associations (regulated by the OCC), and state-chartered savings associations (regulated by the FDIC). 
c Foreign banking offices in  the US include institutions that are not directly regulated by the Federal Reserve 
but are part of a foreign bank organization  (FBO), such as federal branches and agencies of FBOs (regulate d 
by the OCC). 
d Nonbank subsidiaries of BHCs, such as broker -dealers and insurance companies, are not considered to be 
under Federal Reserve  regulation according to the regulatory status of the holder. But broker -dealers are 
considered under Federal Reserve regulation according to the regulatory status of the parent. 
e Investment funds comprise the following institution s in the Financial Accounts : mutual funds, close d-end 
funds, and exchange-traded funds. 
f Entities that have only aspects of consumer or in vestor protection are not considered to be prudentially 
regulated. 
g Structured finance vehicles comprise issuers of asset -backed securities, which are subject to risk -retention 
rules since December 2016. Their assets for 2017 onward are reported in the “O ther agency regulated” 
category. 
Source: Authors’ calculations. 
7
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 10 ---
This institutional perspective highlights the relative importance of different financial 
activities in the broader financial system.  Financial institutions are defined by the activities 
they undertake in financial markets ( that is, their business models) , and these activities, in 
turn, expose the institution to different vulnerabilities. For example, a traditional retail 
bank takes short -term deposits, typically backed by deposit insurance, and  transforms 
these deposits into long -term loans. In doing so, the bank engages in both liquidity and 
maturity transformation. A different financial institution, a finance company, is a nonbank 
lender that engages in more or less the same activities as banks but differs in that its source 
of funding does not come from depositors protected by deposit insurance. In light of this, if 
we observed a shift in financial activity away from traditional banks toward finance 
companies, this suggests that overall financial stability risks have shifted in such a way that 
the financial system as a whole faces greater liquidity risk. In this sense, viewing the data 
through the institutional perspective is useful because doing so highlights the changi ng 
nature of financial vulnerabilities over the credit cycle. 
Finally, we complement the regulatory and institutional perspective by looking at total 
financial assets along these two dimensions simultaneously. This dual perspective is the 
main contribution of our paper. It is useful for a couple of reasons. First, it helps clarify the 
point of entry for macroprudential regulation and policy. 
As an example, imagine that some activity within a particular financial institution is 
identified as posing a signifi cant risk to financial stability. Macroprudential regulators may 
want to take action. In terms of implementing macroprudential policy and communicating 
that policy to the public, it would be helpful to be as clear as possible about the agency that 
bears the ultimate responsibility for the oversight of that particular institution. Concretely, 
consider the case of money market reform following the GFC. Members of the FSOC widely 
agreed that money market funds (MMFs) continued to pose a significant risk to the stability 
of the financial system following the crisis. While the FSOC was clear in identifying this risk, 
helped in communicating it to the public, and facilitated the design of a set of reforms, 
ultimately, it was the responsibility of the SEC to implem ent these reforms. In this sense, 
our approach of simultaneously looking at both the institutional and regulatory 
perspectives makes clear that the point of entry for macroprudential regulation of money 
markets is the SEC. 
Beyond that, the dual perspective  is also useful because it highlights potential regula tory 
overlap. For example, BHCs comprise separate legal subsidiaries. The simplest BHC might 
include a single banking subsidiary chartered as a national bank under its parent holding 
company. From a reg ulatory perspective, the primary regulator for the banking subsidiary 
would be  the OCC, while the holding company would be regulated by the Fed. In other 
words, even in this relatively simple arrangement, the structure of the BHC introduces 
some degree of regulatory overlap. The overlap grows as the structure of the holding 
company becomes more complex. Many BHCs have subsidiaries that are securities 
companies or, alternatively, broker -dealers. Both are regulated by the SEC, which draws a 
third regulator in to the mix. This regulatory overlap highlights the necessity for 
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
cooperation among different regula tory agencies with the common goal of identifying 
financial vulnerabilities and implementing policies to counteract them. This is especially 
true given the complex structure of the US financial regulatory environment. 
This basic approach to breaking out the data by various financial institutions, some of 
which operate under regulatory agencies and some of which do not, guides the remainder 
of the analysis. 
III. Regulatory Boundaries 
In this section, we measure the regulatory boundary from a macroprudential perspective 
and then, within this perimeter, map out regulatory boundaries across various financial 
institutions that are macroprudentially regulated. We also show a measure of regu latory 
overlap for macroprudentially regulated institutions. 
III.1. The Macroprudential Regulatory Boundary 
Figure 2 shows total assets held by US financial institutions as a percent of GDP broken out 
by macroprudentially regulated and unregulated financia l institutions. In the roughly 30 
years from 1980 until the late  2000s, the overall size of financial institutions in the US as 
measured by total asset holdings has more than doubled, growing from just under 200 % of 
GDP in 1980 to almost 500 % in 2008. Since the onset of the GFC, however, this growth has 
flattened, leaving the total size of the financial sector relative to output largely unchanged 
for the past decade. An exception is in the most recent data, whe n financial assets as a 
share of GDP briefly spiked up in Q2 2020 before retracing part of this increase in the 
subsequent quarter. This spike reflects a sharp drop in output owing to the COVID -19 
pandemic, coupled with a large jump up in financial assets h eld by US financial 
institutions.11 Moving into the third quarter of 2020, financial assets continued to grow as 
output rebounded. 
 
11 GDP dropped from $21.8 trillion in Q4 2019 to $19.5 trillion in Q2 2020 while financial assets rose from 
$101.5 trillion to $107.3 trillion, implying the ratio of the financial assets to GDP rose from 47 0% to 550% 
over this period. Moving into Q3 2020, financial assets continued to grow to $109.5 trillion while GDP 
bounced back to $21.2 trillion, leading to a decline in the ratio of financial assets to GDP back to 47 0%. 
9
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 2: Assets Held by US Financial Institutions as a Percent of GDP, by 
Macroprudential Regulatory Status 
 
Sources: Fina ncial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
Decomposing total assets into those on the balance sheets of macroprudentially regulated 
institutions versus those on the balance sheets of nonregulated i nstitutions reveals that the 
unregulated sector grew steadily in the 30 years before the Global Financial Crisis, but its 
growth was slower relative to that of the regulated sector. Since the crisis, the size of the 
unregulated sector has modestly declined  while the regulated sector has remained largely 
flat. All told, most of the growth in total financial assets has come from an expansion of the 
balance sheets of financial institutions that are macroprudentially  regulated, implying that 
the regulatory boundary has expanded over time.  
Indeed, the solid black line in the left panel of Figure 3 shows assets held by regulated 
financial institutions as a percent of total assets in the financial sector. The dashed lin e 
represents the estimated trend using the Hodrick and Prescott ( HP, 1997) filter to capture 
fluctuations at frequencies typically associated with credit cycles. 12 As shown by the 
dashed line, the share of assets within the boundary has gradually risen over time. It stayed 
largely constant in the neighborhood of 65 % of total financial assets  from 1980 until the 
late 1990s, but since that time it has steadily increased, approaching a historic al high of 
about 75 % in the most recent data.  For reference, the ri ght panel of Figure 3 plots a 
standard measure of the credit cycle, private nonfinancial sector credit as a percent of GDP, 
both in levels (solid black line) as well as its associated HP -filtered trend (dashed line). 
Private nonfinancial credit has increas ed roughly 50 % relative to GDP since 1980 . As a 
 
12 The trend and cyclical components of credit-to-GDP ratio are estimated using the methodology of Borio and 
Lowe (2002), which the Bank for International Settlements  (BIS) has endorsed to inform the setting of the 
CCyB (see BCBS 2010). That said, Edge and Meisenzahl (2011) and Buncic and Melecky (2013) question the 
ability of this precise methodolog y to identify periods of excessive credit growth. See Drehmann and 
Tsatsaronis (2014) for a response to these criticisms. For the purposes of this paper, we acknowledge the 
uncertainty surrounding the particular methodology used to estimate the credit gap but proceed using the 
BIS recommendation anyway, which we also extend to measure the regulatory cycle.  
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
result, the estimated trend increased  over the period up to the Global Financial Crisis and 
since has remained unchained. 
Figure 3: The Share of Total Financial Assets Held by Regulated Financial Institutions 
and the Credit-to-GDP Ratio 
(a) Macroprudential Regulatory Boundary 
 
 
(b) Credit-to-GDP Ratio 
 
 
 
Note: Calculated using the HP filter with λ = 14, 000 following Borio and Lowe (2002) and BCBS (2010).  
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
Were the movement of assets across the regulatory boundary to affect systemic risk, one 
proxy for this risk could be the extent to which the cyclical component of the regulatory 
boundary deviates from its long -run trend over the credit cycle. To this end, Figure 4 plots 
the cyclical component of the regulatory perimeter ( that is, the actual regulatory perimeter 
minus its estimated trend from the left panel of Figure 3) alongside the credit cycle (that is, 
the actual credit -to-GDP ratio minus its estimated trend from the right panel of Figure 3). 
National Bureau of Economic Research recession dates are shown in the shaded vertical 
bars. As is well known from the literature, the red line reveals two credit cycles in the US 
data since 1980.  The first is characterized by a rapid expansion of credit in the late 1980s 
and into the early 1990s before a subsequent decline with the bursting of the so -called tech 
bubble. The second is the aggressive expansion of credit in the early to mid -2000s followed 
by an even more rapid credit contraction owing to the Global Financial Crisis. In the most 
recent data, the jump in the credit cycle in 2020 largely reflects the outsized decline in 
output due to the global COVID-19 pandemic that was quickly reversed. 
11
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 4: The Credit Cycle and the Cyclical Component of the Regulatory Perimeter 
 
Note: Calculated using the HP filter with λ = 14, 000 following Borio and Lowe (2002) and BCBS (2010). 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
Plotting the cyclical component of the regulatory boundary (the solid black line in Figure 4) 
alongside the credit cycle (the red dashed line) reveals some interesting information about 
the nature of credit cycles over time. The correlation between the credit cycle and the 
cyclical component of the regulatory boundary over the first 20 years of data presented i n 
this paper is 0.6 5. In other words, the expansion of credit during this period occurred in 
combination with a cyclical expansion of the regulatory boundary, that is , an increase in 
activity of macroprudentially regulated financial institutions relative t o their unregulated 
counterparts. From a financial stability monitoring perspective, there is some comfort to 
take from this as the positive correlation suggests credit expanded as regulated 
institutions—which, in principle, should be more resilient in their ability to withstand 
financial stress owing to some form of macroprudential regulation —played a larger role in 
aggregate financial activity. In contrast, the opposite is true of the expansion of credit going 
into the Global Financial Crisis, which coincided with a cyclical contraction of the 
regulatory perimeter as unregulated institutions played a larger role in credit 
intermediation during this period. Indeed, the correlation be tween the two cyclical series 
flips sign and declines to –0.45 over the last 20 years of the data. This is more worrisome 
because it highlights the possibility that the nature of the credit cycle is more fragile as the 
institutions supporting the expansion of credit are potentially less resilient. 
In the most recent data during the COVID -19 pandemic, the cyclical component of the 
regulatory perimeter increased as assets held by unregulated institutions increased only 
modestly, while assets held by instituti ons within the regulatory boundary jumped up 
sharply. This shift into the regulated sector could be interpreted through Goodhart’s 
(2008) view that regulatory boundaries enhance the procyclicality of credit, with such a 
compositional shift highlighting the  fragility of funding used in unregulated financial 
activity in times of stress and uncertainty.  
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
In summary, there are two main conclusions to take from our measurement of the 
regulatory perimeter. First, the significant expansion of the overall size of t he financial 
sector since 1980 stems largely from institutions that face some form of macroprudential 
regulation. Accordingly, the regulatory boundary has increased steadily over the past 40 
years. Second, cyclical fluctuations in the regulatory boundary c an be informative for 
understanding the nature of credit cycles. From a financial stability monitoring perspective, 
expansions of the credit cycle that are concurrent with a cyclical decline in the regulatory 
boundary are of particular concern as this is an indicator that credit growth is concentrated 
among the least resilient institutions. 
III.2. Boundaries within the Macroprudential Perimeter 
We now assess the footprint of financial institutions that operate within the regulatory 
boundary (institutional v iew) as well as the footprint of various macroprudential 
regulators (regulatory view). 
Figure 5 shows assets held by macroprudentially regulated financial institutions expressed 
as a percent of GDP  (that is , the light blue portion in Figure 2), broken out by type of 
financial institution. The regulated financial institutions in this figure fall into one of four 
categories: depository institution s and nonbank systemically important financial 
institutions; insurance companies; government-sponsored enterprises; and regulated other 
financial intermediaries. 13 Figure 6 presents the same information expressed as a percent 
of total assets held by financial institutions within the regulatory boundary. 
Figure 5: Assets Held by Macroprudentially Regulated US Financial Institutions as a 
Percent of GDP, by Type of Institution 
 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
 
13 Recall that pension funds are not macroprudentially regulated , and hence, assets held by these institutions 
fall into the unregulated category (the red portion in Figure 2). Regulated OFIs include money market funds, 
investment funds, and broker-dealers. 
13
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 6: The Share of Assets Held by Macroprudentially Regulated US Financial 
Institutions, by Type of Institution 
 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
In the early 1980s, roughly two-thirds of all financial assets within the boundary were held 
by DIs, whereas OFIs held only about 10% of regulated assets. Over the next 20 years, the 
rapid growth of nonbank financial institutions within the regulatory boundary produced  a 
striking shift in the structure of the financial system from a macroprudential regulatory 
perspective. The footprint of the banking sector steadily declined, as the share of assets 
held by DIs fell to about one -third by the early  2000s. At the same time , the share of 
financial assets held by OFIs within the boundary increased more than three-fold, peaking 
at nearly 40% on the eve of the GFC. The aftermath of the financial crisis resulted in a sharp 
drawback in the share of assets held by OFIs, but growth  in this sector resumed thereafter , 
with the share of assets of OFIs within the boundary surpassing the share held by DIs  in 
2017. In the most recent data, OFIs ha d the largest footprint in the regulatory boundary at 
39.7% of all assets on the balance shee t of these institutions, followed by DIs (3 4.2%), 
insurance companies (13.1%), and government-sponsored enterprises (12.8%). 
The rapid growth of nonbank financial intermediation warrants closer examination. Figures 
7 and 8 present the assets held by the individual institutions that make up the OFIs as a 
percent of GDP and as a percent of all assets held by OFIs, respectively. In  each figure, the 
data are broken out by OFIs within the macroprudential regulatory boundary (MMFs, 
investment funds , structured finance vehicles  since 2017 , and broker -dealers) and 
unregulated OFIs (REITs, finance companies, structured finance vehicles until 2016, captive 
financial institutions, and pension funds). In the early  1980s, pension funds, which are not 
macroprudentially regulated according to our definition, held nearly 80 % of all assets held 
by both regulated and unregulated OFIs. Subsequent gr owth over the next 20 years was 
mainly driven by investment funds and, to a lesser degree, broker -dealers and unregulated 
structured finance vehicles. On the eve of the Global Financial Crisis, the footprint of pension 
funds had fallen to less than 40 % of all assets held by OFIs, while investment funds rose to 
about one -quarter, broker -dealers increased to 12 %, and structured finance vehicles 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
increased to just more than 11%. In the years since the crisis, the footprint of broker-dealers, 
REITs, and structured finance vehicles have all steadily declined while investment funds have 
continued to expand. In the most recent data, investment funds made up slightly less than 
40% of total assets held by OFIs, pension funds ma de up an additional  40%, an d the 
remainder was accounted for by an assortment of other financial institutions, both regulated 
and unregulated.  
Figure 7: Assets Held by Other Financial Institutions (OFIs) as a Percent of GDP, by 
Type of Institution 
 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
Figure 8: The Share of Assets Held by Other Financial Institutions (OFIs), by Type of 
Institution 
 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
A key takeaway is that the rapid growth of financial activity from the late 1980s to the mid-
2000s was driven by a strong expansion of market -based financial intermediation as the 
footprint of the traditional banking sector in US financial activity steadily declined. 
15
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 18 ---
Turning away from the narrow focus on OFIs and taking a step back to look at 
macroprudentially regulated financial institutions more broadly, Figure 9 shows assets 
held by all institutions within the regulatory boundary as a percent of GDP (the light blue 
portion in Figure 2), but this time these assets are broken out by the primary 
macroprudential regulator of the institution holding the asset (the regulatory view). 14 
Depository institutions are regulated by federal banking regulators (the Fed, the OCC, the 
FDIC, and the NCUA). Insurance companies are regulated primarily by individual states. 
The GSEs have their own regulators (including the FHFA and the FCA) and, final ly, other 
financial intermediaries within the boundary (OFIs), are regulated by the SEC and, to a 
lesser extent, the CFTC. Figure 10 shows the same information expressed in terms of the 
percent of total assets within the regulatory boundary. 
Figure 9: Assets Held by Macroprudentially Regulated US Financial Institutions as a 
Percent of GDP, by Primary Regulatory Agency 
 
a Other banking regulators includes the OCC, the FDIC, and the NCUA.  
b GSE regulators includes the FHFA and the FCA. 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
 
14 By “primary regulator,” we mean the regulatory agency responsible for the institution that directly holds a 
given asset. In some cases, this is trivia l, but when the institution is a subsidiary of a parent holding company, 
it creates the possibility that the primary regulator at the subsidiary level is different from the regulator at 
the parent level. This is addressed in Section III.3. 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 10: The Share of Assets Held by Macroprudentially Regulated US Financial 
Institutions, by Primary Regulatory Agency 
 
a Other banking regulators includes the OCC, the FDIC, and the NCUA.  
b GSE regulators includes the FHFA and the FCA. 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
III.3. Regulatory Overlap 
The US regulatory environment is complex and fragmented in a way that creates overlap 
across different financial regulators for a given institution. In the context of our data, one 
way this can manifest is through assets held on the balance sheet of a subsidiary of a parent 
BHC. Consider a BHC compris ing separate retail banking and broker -dealer subsidiaries. 
The previous section considered boundaries defined by the primary regulator, so for the 
retail banking subsidiary the primary regulator is a federal banking  agency (the Fed, the 
FDIC, or the OCC, depending on the charter), while the primary regulator for the broker -
dealer subsidiary is the SEC. In contrast, the BHC itself is regulated as a single entity at the 
parent level by the Federal Reserve. In this sect ion, we reexamine regulatory boundaries 
from the perspective of the parent holding company , and we quantify the degree of 
regulatory overlap created by this fragmented system. 
Figures 1 1 and 1 2 show the same information as Figures 9 and 10, respectively, b ut 
instead, the data are broken out by regulator at the parent level. Redrawing the regulatory 
boundaries at the parent level highlights that the Federal Reserve ha s a much larger 
footprint when we account for its role as the regulator of BHCs. By the same  token, the role 
of the other banking regulators, including the FDIC, is much more limited. 15 In the mid -
1980s, the Federal Reserve had regulatory responsibility for about one -half of all assets 
 
15 It is worth po inting out that because the FDIC is responsible for deposit insurance for the vast majority of 
depository institutions, this measure, which focuses on the asset side of the balance sheet of different 
financial intermediaries, understates the regulatory footprint of the FDIC. Section IV addresses the limitations 
of our measurement exercise, including the fact that it does not address regulatory reach over the liability 
side of the balance sheet. 
17
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 20 ---
held within the macroprudential regulatory boundary. The expa nsion of market -based 
finance over the next 20 years decreased the regulatory reach of the Federal Reserve, 
which fell to 30% of assets within the boundary leading into the Global Financial Crisis. 
Figure 11: Assets Held by Macroprudentially Regulated US Financial Institutions as a 
Percent of GDP, by Regulatory Agency at the Parent Level 
 
a DFAST:  Dodd–Frank Act Stress Tests.  
b Other banking regulators includes the OCC, the FDIC, and the NCUA.  
c GSE regulators includes the FHFA and the FCA. 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
Figure 12: The Share of Assets Held by Macroprudentially Regulated US Financial 
Institutions, by Regulatory Agency at the Parent Level 
 
a DFAST:  Dodd–Frank Act Stress Tests.  
b Other banking regulators includes the OCC, the FDIC, and the NCUA.  
c GSE regulators includes the FHFA and the FCA. 
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 21 ---
Coming out of the Global Financial Crisis, the Dodd –Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act of 2010 expanded the regulatory reach of the Federal Reserve to 
the neighborhood of 35 % of assets within the boundary. Moreover, the light -lined regions 
in Figures 11 and 12 show assets held on the balance sheet s of BHCs that are subject to the 
Fed’s annual stress test ing as per the Dodd –Frank Act Stress Tests (DFAST). Stress testing 
is one of the key macroprudential tools available to help build resilience in the financial 
system, and it has been actively used by the Federal Reserve in this regard. Although the 
BHCs that are subject to stress testing are some of the largest and most systemically 
important in the financial system, the figures reveal that they account for only about 20% 
of total assets within the boundary. Another prominent macroprudential tool is the CCyB. 
The CCyB is a time -varying capital buffer that can move up and down between 0 % and 
2.5% of common equity Tier 1 capital as a share of risk -weighted assets. The setting of the 
CCyB is based on the discretion of bank regulators over the credit cycle and is intended to 
build resilience in the banking sector. However, its reach is even more limited than stress 
testing’s, as eligibility depends on a  larger total as set threshold compared to DFAST .16 As 
long as macroprudential tools are limited to implementation through the banking sector , 
their reach will be restricted, and even more so as market -based financial intermediation 
plays a larger role in financial activity. 
Finally, the fact that subsidiaries face primary regulators that are potentially different from 
the regulator of their parent BHC raises the possibility of regulatory overlap. That is, the 
assets on the balance sheet of a given subsidiary may face scrutiny from multiple regulators 
(both the primary regulator and the regulator of its parent BHC). Regulatory overlap could 
be good (greater scrutiny by multiple regulators could better identify emerging 
vulnerabilities and could lean against regulatory c apture), or it could be bad (it raises the 
cost of compliance for the institutions facing scrutiny from multiple regulators). 
Regardless, our data allows us to quantitatively measure the degree of regulatory overlap. 
Figure 13 shows the assets held on the balance sheet of financial institutions that face more 
than one regulator (that is, depository institutions or broker -dealers that are subsidiaries 
of a BHC) as a percent of total assets held by all regulated financial institutions. In the mid -
1980s, about  $0.35 of every dollar of assets held within the regulatory boundary were 
subject to regulation by multiple authorities. This share fell steadily over the next 20 years 
and stood at about $0.15 of every dollar on the eve of the Global Financial Crisis. Regulatory 
reform following the crisis led to an increase to just more than $0.20 of every dollar , and 
the share  has stayed relatively constant since that point. Of course, this is an imperfect 
measure of regulatory overlap because financial institutions face  market regulation in 
addition to regulation based simply on their institutional charter. We discuss this, and 
other, limitations in Section IV. 
 
16 In late 2019 the Federal Reserve finalized rules to tailor bank regulations to more closely match bank risk 
profiles. One consequence was that the CCyB now applies to only those banks with total assets of more than  
$250 billion, as opposed to banks subject to the advanced approaches capital rules (Regulation Q appears in 
Title 12, Part 217, Appendix A, of the Code of Federal Regulations.). 
19
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 13: Regulatory Overlap 
 
Note: Regulatory overlap is calculated as assets held by institutions that face more than one macroprudential 
regulator (broker-dealers and BHCs) over total assets held by all regulated institutions.  
Sources: Financial Accounts of the United States, N ational Income and Product Accounts, and author s’ 
calculations. 
IV. Some Limitations 
A number of caveats apply to our analysis. First, our view of regulation is very narrow. We 
are concerned with the regulation of financial institutions from the perspective of 
promoting financial stability. This narrow definition is usef ul primarily because it 
facilitates measurement. Nevertheless, it is important to acknowledge that financial 
regulation is much broader along several dimensions.17 For example, the motivation for 
regulation goes beyond macroprudential objectives.  The objec tive might be oriented 
toward enhancing transparency through disclosure and reporting requirements , 
promoting efficiency through standard setting , promoting competition , providing 
consumer protection , prevention of illicit activity , or taxpayer protection.  Beyond 
objectives, the regulations themselves might be implemented in ways that apply to 
financial activities that transcend institutional boundaries. For example, market activity, 
such as securities or commodities exchange, is regulated separately from t he regulation of 
institutions that participate in those markets. Some of these activities are self -regulated by 
the institutions that participate in the markets. In a similar vein, concern for consumer 
protection factors into the regulation of credit provi sion, which is an activity that spans a 
wide set of institutions. Ideally, a more accurate measure of regulatory boundaries would 
incorporate a wider definition of regulation , but doing so greatly complicates 
measurement. 
Even operating within our narrow d efinition, we are limited by the fact that the Financial 
Accounts simply do not cover some relevant financial institutions. For example, there are 
 
17 See Labonte (2020) for an overview of the complicated structure of financial regulation in the US.  
20
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 23 ---
no data on CCPs. CCPs are relatively small when gauged by the size of total assets held on 
the balance sheets, but these institutions play an outsized role in the efficient functioning of 
financial markets. As such, they are a critical part of the regulatory landscape. Oversight of 
CCPs spans a variety of regulatory agencies, including the SEC, the CFTC, as well as the Fed. 
Hence, failing to include them adds noise to our measurement of boundaries within the 
perimeter. With regard to measurement of the macroprudential regulatory boundary itself, 
it is also the case that the Financial Accounts do not report informa tion over the entirety of 
our sample period  for hedge funds or private equity firms, neither of which sector is  
prudentially regulated.18 This is a meaningful omission as assets held by hedge funds alone 
are as large as $2.7 trillion, accounting for more than 2% of total financial assets in the 
Financial Accounts as of Q2 2022. The implication is that our measurement likely 
overestimates the regulatory reach relative to what we might find if we had data on hedge 
funds or private equity firms. 
Another caveat is that our measurement exercise risks sending a noisy signal about the 
financial stability concerns of certain institutions as well as t he regulatory reach of the 
agencies that oversee these institutions. For example, based solely on asset size, regulatory 
supervision of the largest BHCs implies that the Fed has a critical role in financial stability. 
However, other institutions that have smaller balance sheets may play an equally 
important role in financial stability. For example, CCPs play a critical role in the 
intermediation chain , and as discussed above, our measure does not pick this up. Hence, 
the stability footprint of these types o f institutions and the footprint of their associated 
regulators may be understated based solely on the size of their balance sheets. 
A related point is that using assets to measure boundaries also clouds the fact that financial 
stability risks are very dif ferent across the institutions we examine. A more accurate 
reading of how institutions map into financial stability risk requires a careful examination 
of the entire balance sheet, rather than simply focusing on assets. So, while a given 
institution might be small in terms of assets, it could be the case that its funding structure is 
quite fragile and therefore poses a considerable stability risk relative to financial 
institutions with more stable funding structures. Because our measure of boundaries does 
not capture this, there is a natural tendency to equate regulatory responsibility with size 
and that might not be appropriate. For example, a large bank the relies heavily on retail 
deposits to finance its operations may not pose a significant financial sta bility risk owing to 
deposit insurance, but a similar ly sized bank that is heavily dependent on short -term 
wholesale funding would be a major concern for banking regulators. 
Although these caveats and limitations are important to keep in mind, the view here is that 
there is still significant value in measuring regulatory boundaries. 
 
18 The hedge funds sector h as not been fully incorporated in the regular Financial Accounts publication. 
Starting with the September 2020 ( Q2 2020) Z.1 release , the Financial Accounts publishes a supplementary 
table with the balance sheet s of domestic hedge funds, but this informati on is available only since Q4 2012, 
limiting its usefulness for this exercise. 
21
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 24 ---
V. Conclusions 
This paper uses data from the Financial Accounts of the United States to draw the 
macroprudential regulatory boundary for US financial assets. It shows that over the past 40 
years, this boundary has expanded as the significant expansion of the financial sector since 
1980 has come primarily from institutions that have some macroprudential regulatory 
oversight. That said, cyclical fluctuations in the regulatory perim eter reveal information 
about the nature of credit cycles. From a financial stability monitoring perspective, 
expansions of the credit cycle that are concurrent with a cyclical decline in the regulatory 
boundary are of particular concern as this is an indicator that credit growth is concentrated 
among the least resilient institutions. In addition, we also measure the boundaries between 
different financial institutions and regulatory agencies within the regula tory perimeter and 
provided a quantitative measure of regulatory overlap. These boundaries are important for 
understanding risks to financial stability as well as the design and implementation of 
macroprudential policy. 
VI. References 
Acharya, Viral V., Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez . 2013. “Securitization without Risk 
Transfer.” Journal of Financial Economics 107, no. 3: 515–36.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2012.09.004 
Aiyar, Shekhar, Charles W. Calomiris, and Tomasz Wieladek. 2014. “Does Macro -Prudential 
Regulation Leak? Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment.” Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking 46, no. s1: 181–214.   
https://www.jstor.org/stable/42920115 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision  (BCBS). 2010. “Guidance for National Authorities 
Operating the Countercyclical Capital Buffer.” BCBS Guidelines, December 16, 2010.   
https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs187.htm 
Begenau, Juliane, and Tim Landvoigt. 2022. “Financial Regulation in a Quantitative Model of 
the Modern Banking System.” Review of Economic Studies 89, no. 4, July: 1748–84.   
https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdab088  
Borio, Claudio, and Philip Lowe. 2002. “Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises —Revisited.” 
Bank for International Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review (December): 43–54.   
https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt0212e.pdf 
Buncic, Daniel, and Martin Melecky. 2013. “Equilibrium Credit: The Reference Point for 
Macroprudential Supervision.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6358, 
22
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1

--- Page 25 ---
February 2013.   
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2215481 
Clerc, Laurent, Alexis Derviz, Caterina Mendicino, Stephane Moyen, Kalin Nikolov, Livio 
Stracca, Javier Suarez, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis. 2015. “Capital Regulation in a 
Macroeconomic Model with Three Layers of Default.” International Journal  of Central 
Banking 11, no. 3: 9–63.   
https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb15q3a1.htm 
Crouzet, Nicolas. 2018. “Aggregate Implications of Corporate Debt Choices.” Review of 
Economic Studies 85, no. 3: 1635–82.   
https://academic.oup.com/restud/article/85/3/1635/4371412 
Drehmann, Mathias, and Konstantinos Tsatsaronis. 2014. “The Credit -to-GDP Gap and 
Countercyclical Capi tal Buffers: Questions and Answers .” Bank for International 
Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review (March): 55–73.   
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2457108 
Edge, Rochelle  M., and Ralf Meisenzahl. 2011. “The Unreliability of Credit-to-GDP Ratio 
Gaps in Real-Time: Implications for Countercyclical Capital Buffers.” International Journal 
of Central Banking 7, no. 4: 261–98.   
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1956719 
Fève, Patrick, Alban Moura, and Olivier Pierrard. 2019. “Shadow Banking and Financial 
Regulation: A Small -Scale DSGE Perspective.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control  
101 (April): 130–44.   
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165188918302409 
Fiore, Fiorella D., and Harald Uhlig. 2011. “Bank versus Bond Finance.” Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking 43, no. 7: 1399–421.   
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1538-4616.2011.00429.x 
———. 2015. “Corporate Debt Structure and the Financial Crisis.” Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking 47, no. 8: 1571–98.   
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jmcb.12284 
Gertler, Mark, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino. 2016. “ Chapter 16 : Wholesale 
Banking and Bank Runs in Macroeconomic Modeling of Financial Crises.” In Handbook of 
Macroeconomics, Volume 2 , edited by John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig,  1345–425. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier.   
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574004816000100 
Goodhart, Charles. 2008. “The Boundary Problem in Financial Regulation.” National 
Institute Economic Review 206 (October): 48–55.   
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/national-institute-economic-
23
A Macroprudential Perspective on the Regulatory Boundaries of US Financial Assets Arseneau et al.

--- Page 26 ---
review/article/abs/boundary-problem-in-financial-
regulation/C384CEB73C76CB68FF0C07FA0FBECF34# 
Goodhart, Charles, and Rosa Lastra. 2010. “Border Problems.” Journal of International 
Economic Law 13, no. 3: 705–18.   
https://academic.oup.com/jiel/article/13/3/705/875059 
Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott. 1997. “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An 
Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29, no. 1: 1–16.   
https://doi.org/10.2307/2953682 
International Monetary Fund–Financial Stability Board–Bank for International Settlements 
(IMF-FSB-BIS). 2016. “Elements of Effective Macroprudential Policies: Lessons from 
International Experience.” Joint report, August 31, 2016.   
https://www.bis.org/publ/othp26.htm 
Labonte, Marc. 2020. “Who Regulates Whom? An Overview of the U.S. Financial Regulatory 
Framework.” Congressional Research Service, Report No. R44918, March 2020.   
https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/20200310_R44918_8448f8813e769930dd24033b
cf31091ff31028c8.pdf 
Meeks, Roland, Benjamin Nelson, and Piergiorgio Alessandri. 2017. “Shadow Banks and 
Macroeconomic Instability.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 49, no. 7: 1483–516.   
https://doi.org/10.1111/jmcb.12422 
Mendicino, Caterina, Kalin Nikolov,  Javier Suarez, and Dominik Supera. 2018. “Optimal 
Dynamic Capital Requirements.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 50, no. 6: 1271–97.   
https://doi.org/10.1111/jmcb.12490 
Moreira, Alan, and Alexi Savov. 2017. “The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking.” Journal of 
Finance 72, no. 6: 2381–432.   
https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12540 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, 
which allows sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The 
work may not be changed or used commercially. 
 
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 1