--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 4 
2023 
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 
R. Jay Kahn 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
Matthew McCormick 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Vy Nguyen 
Office of International Trade and Investment Policy, US Department of the Treasury 
Mark Paddrik 
Office of Financial Research, US Department of the Treasury 
H. Peyton Young 
Office of Financial Research, US Department of the Treasury 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kahn, R. Jay; McCormick, Matthew; Nguyen, Vy; Paddrik, Mark; and Young, H. Peyton (2023) "Anatomy of 
the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 4, 1-25. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1521 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss4/1 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol5/iss4/1

--- Page 3 ---
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes  
in September 20191  
R. Jay Kahn,2 Matthew McCormick,3 Vy Nguyen,4 Mark Paddrik,5 and H. Peyton Young6 
Abstract 
Repurchase agreement (repo) markets represent one of the largest sources of funding and 
risk transformation in the US financial system. Despite the large volume, repo rates can be 
quite volatile, and in the extreme, they have exhibited intraday spikes that  are five to 10 
times the rate on a typical day. This paper uses a unique combination of intraday timing data 
from the repo market to examine the potential causes of the dramatic spike in repo rates in 
mid-September 2019. We conclude that, in large part, t he spike resulted from a confluence 
of factors that, when taken individually, would not have been nearly as disruptive. Our work 
highlights how a lack of information transmission across repo segments and stickiness in 
customer-to-dealer markets most likely exacerbated the spike. These findings are instructive 
in the context of repo market liquidity, demonstrating how the segmented structure of the 
market can contribute to its fragility. 
 
Keywords: financial intermediation, market segmentation, rate spikes, repurchase 
agreements, short-term funding  
 
JEL Classifications: D40, D82, G14 
 
1 The views expressed in this working paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate 
concurrence by the Office of Financial Research (OFR), the US Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors, or the Federal Reserve System. Any errors are the sole responsibility of the authors. The 
authors thank Sebastian Infante, Ram Yamarthy, and participants at an OFR brownbag and the Yale Program 
on Financial Stability’s 2023 conference, “Fighting a Financial Crisis,” for helpful comments and suggestions. 
2 R. Jay Kahn, senior economist, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, jay.kahn@frb.gov. 
3 Matthew McCormick, senior financial sector advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,   
matthew.mccormick@dal.frb.org. 
4 Vy Nguyen, international economist, Office of International Trade and Investment Policy, US Department of 
the Treasury, vy.nguyen2@treasury.gov. 
5 Mark Paddrik, associate director of financial institutions, Office of Financial Research, US Department of the 
Treasury, mark.paddrik@ofr.treasuty.gov. 
6 H. Peyton Young, research principal, Office of Financial Research, US Department of the Treasury , 
hobart.young@ofr.treasury.gov. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction 
Repurchase agreement (repo) markets represent one of the largest sources of funding and 
risk transformation in the US financial system. They provide a relatively stable and flexible 
source of secure short -term funding for banks, securities dealers, and oth er large financial 
institutions that rely on the market to fund short -term liquidity provision and leveraged 
investments. Currently, the daily volume of transactions on all US repo markets exceeds 
$3 trillion. Despite the large volume, repo rates can be quite volatile, and in the extreme, they 
have exhibited intraday spikes that are five to 10 times the rate on a typical day. A notable 
example, and the focus of this work, occurred on September 17, 2019 —when the intraday 
repo rate rose to more than 300 basis points above the upper end of the federal funds target 
range. This was 30 times larger than the same spread during the preceding week (see Figure 
1). Although short-lived, this event and its spillover into other short-term funding markets, 
such as the fed eral funds market, prompted the Federal Reserve to step in and introduce 
cash to the market through a repo facility.  
Figure 1: Repo Rate Spikes, August 2014–September 2019  
 
Notes: Tri -party repo average rate is the weighted average daily rate on new overnight Treasury repo 
transactions from Bank of New York Mellon repo data. All rates are spreads over the federal funds target range 
midpoint. The upper dashed line shows the interest rate on excess reserves and the lower dashed line shows 
the Overnight Reverse Repurchase (ON RRP) Facility  rate. The y axis of this graph is trun cated at 1%, cutting 
off the y-value for September 17, 2019, which stood at 3.06%. 
Sources: FRB BONY Tri-Party Repo Collection; FRBNY Effective Federal Funds Rate; FRED; authors’ analysis. 
Using a unique combination of data sources available to the US Department of the Treasury’s 
Office of Financial Research (OFR), we examine the potential causes of the dramatic spike in 
repo rates in mid -September 2019. Although the spike was likely driven in part by the low 
level of reserves, as has been previously suggested in Afonso et al. (2021); Copeland, Duffie, 
and Yang  (2021); and Correa , Du, and Liao  (2020), we argue low reserves alone may be 
unable to account for either the timing of the spike or its severity. Instead, we suggest that a 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
confluence of more immediat e factors such as tax payments and Treasury issuance dates 
contributed to the size of the spike. 7 We provide evidence that a lack of transparency plus 
imperfect intermediation may have substantially contributed to the disruption on 
September 17, and to a large pullback in funding by money market funds (MMFs) caused by 
corporate tax deadlines on the 16th. 
A novel contribution of the paper is its detailed analysis of the intraday and interday 
dynamics of different repo market segments, which sheds light on t he roles of different 
classes of intermediaries in the market. We use this data to show that on the 16th, decreases 
in money market fund assets associated with corporate tax payments translated almost one 
for one into decreases in repo investments. We also  use the intraday pattern of rate 
movements on September 16 –17 to suggest that a lack of transparency plus imperfect 
intermediation may have substantially contributed to the disruption. Finally, we examine 
how the Federal Reserve’s interventions in the rep o market affected lending by dealers, 
using a high-frequency event study to show that there was a sizable and speedy passthrough 
from Federal Reserve lending to dealers into their cleared repo activity. 
Understanding the sources of volatility in repo rates  is important not just for financial 
institutions but for policymakers as well. The repo market underpins the Secured Overnight 
Financing Rate ( SOFR), which has supplanted LIBOR as the primary reference rate for a 
diverse range of financial products.8 By shedding light on how segmented markets can 
increase the fragility of the repo market during stress times, our work informs future policy 
considerations for strengthening repo market functioning. 
II. Structure of the Repo Market  
Before proceeding, we present a brief overview of the main repo markets and how they differ 
in participation, clearing, transparency, type of collateral, and settlement times. 9 
Understanding these differences is key to understanding how structural features of the repo 
market can exacerbate price volatility. 
A repo transaction involves the sale of assets together with an agreement to repurchase them 
on a specified future date at a prearranged price. Market participants use repos for many 
reasons, including financing their  portfolios, using cash as collateral to borrow securities, 
and as a safer alternative to uninsured deposits. Central banks also use repos as important 
monetary policy tools. 
Assets underlying a repo are used as collateral to protect cash lenders against t he risk that 
cash borrowers will fail to return the cash. Cash lenders typically require 
 
7 For a discussion of some of these factors, see Afonso et al. (2021) ; Anbil, Anderson, and Senyuz (2021); 
Copeland, Duffie, and Yang (2021); and Correa, Du, and Yang (2020). 
8 See Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2021). 
9 For more detailed reviews about the repo market, see Adrian et al. (201 4); Baklanova, Copeland, and 
McCaughrin (2015); and Kahn and Olson (2021). 
3
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 6 ---
overcollateralization, and thus, the value of the assets pledged as collateral is discounted. 
This discount is typically referred to as a haircut. Additionally, repo transactions specify the 
types of securities that are acceptable as collateral, as well as the associated haircuts or initial 
margin requirements. Although most repos are overnight transactions, they can be entered 
into with a range of maturities. The interest rate on these transactions is calculated based on 
the difference between the sale price and the repurchase price of the assets underlying the 
repo, and the rate can be negotiated on either a fixed or a floating basis. 
Repo Market Segments 
The US repo market has four distinct segments. One way of describing these segments is by 
distinguishing between transactions that are settled on the books of a tri -party custodian 
bank and transactions that are settled bilaterally. Two segments settle on the books of a tri-
party custodian: (1) the non -centrally cleared tri-party repo segment, in which the Bank of 
New York Mellon (BONY) serves as the custodian ; and (2) the centrally cleared General 
Collateral Finance  (GCF) repo segment, which is cleared by the Fixed Inc ome Clearing 
Corporation (FICC). The tri -party segment primarily consists of dealers and large banks 
borrowing from smaller dealers, MMFs, and other asset managers. Tri -party is also the 
segment through which the Federal Reserve intervenes in the repo market. The GCF segment 
largely consists of transactions between large financial institutions such as dealers, banks, 
and government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs).10 
Bilateral transactions occur in two additional segments: (3) those cleared by FICC’s Delivery-
to-Payment (DVP) repo service, and (4) non-centrally cleared bilateral repos (NCCBRs). DVP 
is a large segment among clearing members that allows dealers to trade specific securities. 
It also includes trades with certain other institutions, such as MMFs and hedge funds, that 
are not direct clearing members but are allowed to participate through sponsorship by a 
clearing member. These trades are known as sponsored DVP repo. Meanwhile, the non -
centrally cleared bilateral repo market serves as an important sourc e of leverage for hedge 
funds, and it is also the primary venue for repo lending by primary dealers. However, data 
on this market is not available for September 2019, and thus, it is not a part of our dataset. 
Figure 2 displays these four distinct segments  of the market and the flow of funds between 
the principal participants. 
 
10 The FICC also offers a Sponsored General Collateral service that includes transaction types similar to  those 
offered by the existing FICC GCF repo service. However, the Sponsored General Collateral service allows entities 
that are not direct clearing members of FICC to participate in these transactions. Because this market began 
trading in September 2021, following its approval by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), it is  not 
part of our discussion. 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 2: Segments of the Repo Market 
 
Note: Arrows denote the flow of cash from cash lenders to cash borrowers.  
Source: Authors’ illustration. 
Daily Repo Clearing Cycle 
The majority of funding provided through repos in the US financial system is overnight and 
therefore can be renegotiated on a daily basis. Figure 3 presents the average intraday 
clearing cycle for GCF, DVP, and tri -party. This figure highlights the fact that m ost of the 
activity in each repo market segment occurs during only a few hours in the morning. Within 
each market segment, hourly rates typically vary by just a few basis points over the course 
of the day. Trades in cleared DVP and GCF generally occur slig htly earlier than in tri -party, 
in part because of settlement  timing differences between these markets. 11 Moreover, the 
concentration of volumes at the beginning of the day has been explained by market 
participants as a response to overdraft fees assessed by clearing banks at 8:30 a.m. 
 
11 See Clark et al. (2021) ; Copeland, Duffie, and Yang (2021) ; and Paddrik, Ramírez, and McCormick (2021). 
Additionally, these figures are calculated o ver 2021, so the tri -party timing figure likely reflects the presence 
of the Federal Reserve’s ON RRP facility, which operates later in the day than many private repo transactions.  
5
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 3: Daily Clearing Cycle for Tri-party, GCF, and DVP 
 
Notes: Blue line shows the cumulative percent of total daily volume in each market transacted before each 15 -
minute interval of the day averaged over all days in 2021. The dashed lines show the 25th and 75th percentiles 
across days.  
Source: OFR Cleared Repo Collection; FRB BONY Tri-Party Repo Collection; authors’ calculations. 
III. Potential Causes of Rate Spikes  
Our analysis begins with a review of a variety of factor s that may have contributed to the 
abrupt spike in repo rates in September 2019. Some factors are transitory, while others 
result from long-term trends that brought about an overall tightening in money markets, and 
both were exacerbated by frictions in the repo market. We begin with the long-term trends, 
specifically in the reserve balances banks maintained with the Federal Reserve and the 
amount of Treasuries outstanding. 
Long-term Trends: Reserve Balances and Treasuries Outstanding 
A wealth of papers have  provided evidence that low levels of reserves and high levels of 
outstanding Treasuries played a key role in driving the September 2019 repo spike and other 
spikes in the preceding years, including Afonso et al. (2021) ; Correa, Du, and Liao (2020) ; 
Copeland, Duffie, and Yang (2021); and d’Avernas, Han, and Vandeweyer (2023). In October 
2014, reserves stood at a high of roughly $2.8 trillion, but from 2017 to 2019, the Federal 
Reserve gradually reduced the size of its balance sheet by not reinvesting a part of its 
maturing securities. Consequently, aggregate reserves decline d to a multiyear low of less 
than $1.4 trillion by mid -September 2019 (see Figure 4). Simultaneously, marketable 
Treasuries outstanding increased from $12.3 trillion in October 2014 to more than  $16 
trillion by the beginning of September 2019 owing in part to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 
2017. 
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 4: Reserves and Treasuries Outstanding, 2010-2021 
 
Notes: The level of reserves is estimated from weekly data on reserves from the Federal Reserve’s H.4.1 release, 
and daily changes in key factors affectin g reserves and Treasuries outstanding are estimated using daily data 
on Treasury issuance. 
Sources:  Daily Treasury Statement; FRB H.4.1. Factors Affecting Reserves Release; FRBNY Repo Operations Data; 
TreasuryDirect; authors’ calculations. 
Many papers provide a theoretical link between the level of reserves or of reserves relative 
to Treasuries and either the level of repo rates or the potential for repo spikes. 12 Although 
the microfoundations for these papers may differ, the essential point is that the repo market 
allows participants to temporarily convert their Treasury holdings into cash. The repo rate, 
which provides the cost for this conversion, should therefore respond to the relative supply 
of Treasuries and of cash, which in turn is determined by the supply of reserves. The amount 
of cash available to dealers to lend in repo markets may decline as reserves decline. Similarly, 
increased Treasuries outstanding may increase the demand for r epo borrowing by dealers 
to finance their positions in Treasuries. 
In Figure 5, we examine the relationship between the ratio of reserves to Treasuries 
outstanding and the repo rate from August 22, 2014, to September 17, 2019, following from 
a similar figu re in d’Avernas , Han,  and Vandeweyer (202 3). Since data on reserves is not 
publicly available on a daily frequency, we construct a daily estimate using the weekly series 
on reserves provided in the Federal Reserve’s H.4.1 release and subtracting changes in  ON 
RRP volumes and changes in the Treasury General Account (TGA) and adding System Open 
Market Account (SOMA) net securities purchases in the intervening week. 13 We then divide 
this series by outstanding Treasuries calculated from daily data on issuance. This is plotted 
 
12 For two examples, see d’Avernas, Han, and Vandeweyer (2023) and Yang (2020). 
13 These estimates are imperfect since they do not capture other balance sheet items that are not reported on 
a daily basis , for instance, the foreign repo pool, currency in circulation , and centrally bank liquidity swaps . 
However, regressing the true w eekly release on our daily estimate obtains a coefficient  very close to 1 and an 
R-squared above 99%, which shows that our daily estimate is extremely close to the true value on days where 
we can observe the true value of reserves . Moreover, we obtain almo st identical results working backward 
from the next H.4.1 release instead of forward from the last release.  
7
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 10 ---
against the spread of the Tri -party General Collateral Rate (TGCR) over the interest rate on 
reserve balances. 
Figure 5: Reserves and Repo Spreads, August 22, 2014–September 17, 2019 
 
Notes: The ratio of reserves to Treasuries outstanding is calculated using estimates from weekly data on 
reserves from the Federal Reserve’s H.4.1 release and daily changes in key factors affecting reserves and daily 
data on Treasury issuance. The spread is calculated using daily data on the Tri -party General Collateral Rate 
and the interest rate on excess reserves (IOER) . The black line is the OLS best fit for  a regression of the TGCR -
IOER spread on reserves over outstanding Treasuries for data through September 13, 2019. 
Sources:  Daily Treasury Statement; FRB H.4.1. Factors Affecting Reserves Release; FRBNY Reference Rates; FRBNY 
Repo Operations Data; TreasuryDirect; authors’ calculations. 
Examining Figure 5, a clear pattern emerges between the level of reserves relative to 
Treasuries, and spreads between funding markets. Low levels of reserves are associated with 
higher repo rates, and vice versa. However, there are two important caveats to this 
relationship. 
First, the relationship is highly nonlinear. September 17 remains an extreme outlier relative 
to the black line, which shows a fitted line estimated using data through September 13. In 
Figure 6, we show the evolution of reserves and the SOFR over the two weeks surrounding 
the repo spike. Examining this table, we can see that reserves were at their lowest point on 
September 16, having fallen by $81 billion from September 13. However, rates on the 16th 
were at only 2.43%, while on the 17th , after reserves had increased by $35 billion, rates 
spiked to 5.25%. Even if one subtracts the reserves added by the Federal Reserve’s repo 
operations, the total decline in reserves from the 16th to the 17th would have been only $6 
billion. While this may reflect constraints on banks that become extremely bi nding at low 
reserves as suggested by Afonso et al. (2021), it is also important to note that many other 
days with quite low levels of reserves did not have similarly high repo rates. We propose that 
the gentle slope of most of the relationship between res erves and funding spreads is best 
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 11 ---
reconciled with the extreme nonlinearity when reserves are relatively low by considering 
the role of informational frictions. 
Figure 6: Changes in Federal Reserve Balances and Treasury Cash Flow in Sept. 2019 
Date SOFR 
(%) 
Federal Reserve Balances  
($ billions) 
Treasury Cash Flow 
($ billions) 
Reserves TGA 
 
ON RRP Repo ΔTGA Coupon 
Issuance 
Corporate 
Tax 
Payments 
09/09 2.12 1,441 190 3 0 9 0 0 
09/10 2.14 1,437 194 4 0 4 0 1 
09/11 2.15 1,459 184 4 0 –10 0 1 
09/12 2.20 1,447 195 3 0 12 0 3 
09/13 2.20 1,428 216 3 0 20 0 16 
09/16 2.43 1,347 299 2 0 83 54 35 
09/17 5.25 1,382 308 2 41 9 0 1 
09/18 2.55 1,385 303 19 52 –5 0 0 
09/19 1.95 1,395 314 5 56 11 0 0 
09/20 1.86 1,399 311 8 59 –3 0 0 
Notes: Reserve balances with asterisks are from weekly data on reserves from the Federal Reserve’s H.4.1 
release. Reserve balances without asterisks are estimated using daily changes in key factors affecting reserves. 
TGA is the Treasury General Account, ON  RRP is the Overnight Reverse Repurchase Facility, and Repo is 
outstanding Federal Reserve repo operations. Coupon issuance is the total issuance of all coupon Treasuries, 
and corporate tax payments are total income tax payments reported by the Treasury. 
Sources: Daily Treasury Statement; FRB H.4.1. Factors Affecting Reserves Release; FRBNY Reference Rates; FRBNY 
Repo Operations Data; TreasuryDirect; authors’ calculations. 
A second caveat relevant to September 16 is that larger spikes occurred before September 
16 when reserves were more abundant, implying that reserves alone cannot explain the 
timing of the spike; factors other than the level of reserves may have been important in 
triggering the extreme increase in rates. While reserves and the su pply of Treasuries 
certainly played a key role, we argue that segmentation and the microstructure of the repo 
market may have been crucial for both the magnitude and timing of the spike. These factors 
depended more on the proximate causes of the spike, to which we now turn. 
9
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 12 ---
Proximate Causes 
One starting point for examining the proximate causes is the detail Figure 6 provides on what 
drove the decrease in reserves from September 13 to September 16. The table shows that 
the decrease in reserves of $81 billion  was driven primarily by an increase in the Treasury 
General Account, which increased by $83 billion. The TGA is the account at the Federal 
Reserve that the Treasury uses to hold its cash balances. When the Treasury borrows or 
takes in more tax payments th an it spends, it increases the balance in the TGA, which then 
reduces reserves. Previous work has pointed out the importance of the TGA in the repo spike, 
notably Correa, Du, and Liao (2020). 
The last two columns in Figure 6 show two important components of the increase in the TGA 
account: a net coupon Treasury settlement on the 16th of $5 4 billion, and payments to the 
Treasury of $35 billion for the corporate income tax for the third quarter of 2019, which also 
had a deadline on the 16th. Since both actions increase the cash held by the Treasury on the 
16th, all else equal, they lead to an increase in the TGA and a decrease in reserves. However, 
Treasury issuance and corporate tax payments not only affect the repo rate through the 
supply of reserves but also alter the needs of specific borrowers and lenders to transact. We 
discuss the effects of these two actions in more detail  over the remainder of this section , as 
well as some other potential proximate causes of the repo spike. 
Treasury Settlement 
Settlement of large issuances of Treasury notes and bonds generates additional demand for 
repo to finance purchases of these Treasury securities. A significant share of repo demand 
comes from primary dealers, which normally absorb a substantial share of Treasury 
issuances onto their balance sheets until they can gradually sell them to their customers. 
Dealers rely heavily on repo to fund these initial purchases and generally decrease their 
funding of a new issuance through repo gradually as they have time to sell off the issue. 
The effects of issuance may have been exacerbated by the large increase in Treasuries 
outstanding over the previous three years, combined with limited demand from foreign 
purchasers of Treasuries. Combined, these two forces contributed to a l arger amount of 
Treasuries remaining on dealer balance sheets for longer. With net Treasury positions held 
by primary dealers near all -time highs in September, it is possible that the additional debt 
issued added to the already strained dealer balance shee ts by increasing their repo 
borrowing, thus further strengthening upward pressure on repo rates (Anbil, Anderson, and 
Senyuz 2020). 
While the Treasury issuance on the 16th has received a great deal of attention, it is also 
important to recognize that it may not have had as direct an effect on primary dealers as 
many other settlements. Of the $78 billion in gross Treasuries settling on the 16th, $40 billion 
was in Treasuries being reopened, in particular a 30 -year bond and 10 -year note being 
reopened for the first time. Reopenings are not new issues but rather additional issuance of 
existing securities. Since these securities already exi st, dealers will frequently short -sell 
these Treasuries in advance of their issuance, often at a penalty rate known as a special 
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 13 ---
collateral rate. 14 When the issue is reopened, dealers who have lent against it are able to 
purchase the securities at auction using the repayment by their borrowers and return the 
securities to their lenders. Figure 7 shows that  the on-the-run bond and note  were indeed 
trading at a special collateral rate before their reopening on the 16th. This means that on the 
16th, dealers may have been better able to prepare for the effects of issuance, since through 
short-selling they may have effectively already sourced the funding for their purchase of the 
securities before the settlement date. 
Figure 7: General Collateral and On-the-run Collateral Repo Rates, Aug.–Sept. 2023 
 
Notes: Dark vertical line denotes a new issuance of the 10 -year and 30 -year on-the-run bond and note; light 
gray line denotes the reopening on September 16. 
Source: Refinitiv. 
Quarterly Tax Payments 
While Treasury settlements may make dealers less elastic in their demand for repo funding, 
corporate tax payments tend to be associated with reduced lending from money market 
funds as corporations withdraw cash to meet their obligations to the Treasury. Repo is  one 
of the more liquid assets money market funds have at their disposal and tends to be the first 
asset they sell when they need to meet these outflows. 
To provide some detail on the drivers of MMF activity and their relationship to these tax 
payments, we assemble a daily series of MMF total assets from Crane’s Money Market Fund 
Monitor. We then match each MMF to lenders across tri -party and DVP markets at the fund 
family level. Matching at the family level is key because market participants report that 
MMFs make joint decisions within a family on their allocations of cash to repo. This mapping 
allows us to establish a daily panel of MMF family assets matched with repo lending in both 
DVP and tri-party. 
 
14 See D’Amico and Pancost (2021) and Hempel and Kahn (2021) for more detailed discussions of special 
collateral rates before reopenings. 
11
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 14 ---
In Figure 8, we show a daily series of MMF total asset s. The effect of the tax deadline was a 
decrease in MMF total assets by about $35 billion on September 16 from the week before. 
This is in line with decreases observed on previous tax dates. As we will show in Section IV, 
this reduction in MMF assets corre sponds almost one -to-one with the decrease in MMFs’ 
repo lending. 
Figure 8: Money Market Fund Assets, August 1–October 1, 2019 
 
Notes: Data is for money market funds that appear throughout the sample. 
Sources: Crane’s Money Market Fund Monitor; authors’ calculations. 
Other Proximate Causes 
Some market commentators have suggested that sponsored repo borrowing by hedge funds, 
which rely on repo to fund arbitrage basis trades using highly leveraged positions, may have 
been a contributing factor.15 As we shall see in Section IV, however, increased borrowing by 
hedge funds through sponsored DVP repo was quite minor compared to other changes in 
supply and demand in mid -September 2019. Other observers have suggested that an 
unanticipated oil shock in Saudi Arabia led to a surge in margin calls at commodity 
exchanges, which in turn reduced the amount of cash available for repo lending (Domm 
2019; Kaminska 2019 ). Given data limitations, however, we have not been able to verify 
either of these potential explanations. 
In addition, the events of the 16th occurred in a brief window between two GSE “float 
periods,” which may have reduced the availability of cash in repo markets. Before the 
introduction of the uniform mortgage-backed security (MBS), Freddie Mac and F annie Mae 
paid principal and interest on MBS s on the 15th and 25th of the month, respectively 
 
15 See in particular Avalos, Ehlers, and Eren (2019) and Smith (2019). For more on hedge fund involvement in 
the basis trade, see Barth and Kahn (2021). 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 15 ---
(Anderson and Huther 2016). During periods of approximately five days leading up to these 
payment dates, the GSEs hold cash reserves used for payments at the Fede ral Reserve, or 
they invest in repos. September 16 would have been the Freddie Mac payment date, and it 
occurred before Fannie Mae would have begun building up cash reserves, leading to a likely 
net outflow of cash from repo markets relative to the week before. 
Exacerbating Frictions 
It is worth considering some of the frictions repo market participants face that can 
exacerbate these factors affecting supply and demand for funds. Internal frictions may have 
played a role in increasing banks’ demand for reserves and reducing their flexi bility in 
responding to price signals in repo. While the aggregate supply of reserves was still large 
relative to the period preceding the 2007–09 financial crisis, the level of reserves banks 
required may have increased owing to the suite of regulatory and supervisory programs put 
in place following the 2007–09 financial crisis . In particular, the liquidity coverage ratio 
(LCR) and Regulation YY’s requirements for resolution liquidity adequacy and positioning 
(RLAP) may have increased banks’ demand for reserves. Broadly, the LCR requires banks to 
prefund a sufficient amount of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) (for example, assets such as 
Treasuries or reserves that can be converted into cash) to meet their projected net cash 
outflows over a 30 -day stress p eriod. Although reserves and Treasuries are both HQLA of 
equivalent standing, Andolfatto and Ihrig (2019) report that banks occasionally feel 
pressured to hold reserves rather than Treasuries to satisfy their HQLA requirements. More 
importantly, RLAP imposes additional restrictions by requiring each individual subsidiary to 
hold enough HQLA to meet expected intraday outflows without relying on transfers from 
affiliates. This requirement reduces banks’ flexibility in sourcing funds internally, making 
them less likely to increase repo lending by sourcing cash from other parts of the firm. 
More generally, the spillovers from the September 2019 repo episode to the foreign 
exchange (FX) swaps market noted by Tran (2020) and others are likely indicative of such 
internal frictions. Some spillover between these markets would naturally result from foreign 
banks choosing to source US dollars in FX swaps instead of repo. However, the FX swaps 
market is heavily intermediated by the same  global systemically important bank s (GSIBs) 
that are active in repo, and lending in FX swaps increased relative to repo despite a smaller 
increase in rates (Correa, Du, and Liao 2020). These latter facts provide suggestive evidence 
that frictions in banks’ ability to internally reallocate capital led to these adjustments being 
made instead on an external margin. 
Finally, the US repo market is highly segmented. In the tri -party segment, deals are 
negotiated bilaterally, and thus, trading dynamics depend on strong relationships between 
dealers and MMFs. In contrast, the FICC -cleared DVP segment is brokered, so the identities 
of borrowers and lenders remain anonymous. Moreover, only a few primary dealers and 
banks can access both segments, while smaller dealers are confined to the FICC -cleared 
segment only. As a result of this segmentation, Anbil, Anderson, and Senyuz (2021) observe 
that on September 16  and 17, smaller dealers faced higher funding costs —almost 1 
percentage point higher, relative to other FICC participants—given their lack of access to the 
tri-party segment. Higher repo rates in the FICC-cleared segment then transmitted to the tri-
13
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 16 ---
party segment because MMFs were able to extract higher rates from dealers, which were 
willing to pass on profits to maintain these strong trading rel ationships.16 The effects of 
segmentation may have been exacerbated by a great deal of uncertainty among lenders 
about the reason for the sudden spike in rates, which discouraged them from stepping in 
promptly (Afonso et al. 2021). 
In this paper, we highlight the importance of lack of transparency in driving high repo rates 
on September 17. We show that because of the segmented nature of the repo market, and 
because customers may have limited visibility into repo markets on a high -frequency basis, 
rates for  large cash providers such as MMFs lagged behind interdealer rates when cash 
became scarce on September 16. Then, we show that on September 17, when cash became 
less scarce following the Federal Reserve’s intervention, the rates MMFs demanded 
remained high. This suggests that limited transparency or stickiness in MMFs’ investment 
decisions played a role in the extreme rate highs on September 17, since the scarcity of funds 
in the interdealer segment of the market was not reflected in the returns MMFs could receive 
for introducing more cash into the market. 
IV. Interday and Intraday Analysis of September 16–18, 2019  
In this section, we take a closer look at the intraday pattern of rates and the changes in supply 
and demand for funding on September 16–18. 
Lending and Borrowing Behavior 
First, we examine the lending and borrowing behavior of different categories of firms on 
September 16–18, relative to an average day during the week before, when conditions were 
fairly quiet. Figures 9a and 9b show the changes in ag gregate lending and borrowing, 
respectively, over three repo markets (tri -party + DVP + GCF) for nine categories of firms. 
Figure 9c provides a unified picture by showing the net change in lending minus borrowing 
for each class of participants. 
 
16 For a broader discussion of repo market trading dynamics, see Anbil, Anderson, and Senyuz (2021) and Han, 
Nikolaou, and Tase (2022). 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 9: Interday Changes in Repo Activity, September 16–18, 2019 
a) Change in Lending b) Change in Borrowing c) Change in Net Lending 
   
 
Notes: These figures show the change in repo lending, repo borrowing , and net repo lending in billions of 
dollars on September 16 –18, 2019,  relative to the average day in the week before across different types of 
lenders and borrowers. The data is for the sum of tri-party, DVP, and GCF segments of the market. 
Sources: OFR Cleared Repo Collection; FRB BONY Tri-Party Repo Collection; authors’ calculations. 
In aggregate, the total change in transaction volume on September 16 was not particularly 
large compared to day -to-day changes over the subsequent period of December 2019 –July 
2022. Total volume over all three markets declined by 1.7%, compared with the volume on 
the previous trading day (September 13). Although this change is much larger than that seen 
on an average day, which is about 0.11%, the standard deviation of day -to-day changes is 
considerable, at 2.47%. Hence, the increase on September 16 was not exceptionally large, 
relative to the previous period. Figure 9c shows that the largest decrease in lending behavior 
resulted from MMFs’ pulling back by about $35 billion. 
On September 17 and 18, the total volume of repo lending increased by $75  billion, to $125 
billion, compared to the week before and by $230 billion compared to the day  before. This 
exceptionally large increase owed in large part to repo lending by the Feder al Reserve to 
primary dealers and foreign banks through the tri -party market. On net, hedge funds 
increased their sponsored repo borrowing by about $8 billion, but this amount is quite small 
compared to the overall changes in lending and borrowing. This finding suggests a limited 
role for hedge funds’ sponsored activity in the repo spike. 
15
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 10: Regression of Repo Lending by MMFs on Change in MMF Assets 
Dependent Variable Change in MMF Repo Lending 
Change in MMF Assets  
   Coefficient 0.993 
   t-statistic (7.68) 
R-squared 0.546 
Notes: This table shows the results of a cross -sectional regression of the change in repo lending by MMFs on 
September 16 on the change in MMF assets over the week  before. Change in repo lending includes all MMF 
transactions across DVP and tri -party markets. The regression is conducted at the family level. The t-statistic 
for the test of the null hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to zero is in parentheses, and strongly rejects the 
null. 
Sources: Crane’s Money Market Fund Monitor; FRB BONY Tri-Party Repo Collection; OFR Cleared Repo Collection; 
authors’ calculations. 
Money market funds represented the largest decrease in net lending on September 16. 
Notably, the reduction in MMFs’ lending corresponds very nearly to the $35 billion decrease 
in their assets over the week  before, as we noted in Section III. In Figure 10, we estimate a 
regression of MMF family lending on September 16 in different repo segments on the seven-
day change in total assets for the fund family. The results show that a $1 billion decrease in 
a fund family’s assets corresponded to a $0.993 billion decrease in their total repo lending 
activities across both DVP and tri -party. In other words, the total  reduction in MMF assets 
corresponds almost one -to-one with the decrease in MMF lending into repo. 17 Figure 11 
plots the coefficient in Figure 10 along with a binned scatter of changes in MMF net assets (x 
axis) and their average change in repo (y axis). Although we do not show it here, the majority 
of the decrease was in DVP, which is consistent with DVP ’s serving as a vehicle for MMFs 
investing excess cash. As noted by Afonso et al. (2021), this dynamic may have increased the 
intermediation costs for deal ers that rely on funding from MMFs through sponsored repo, 
since netting benefits would have decreased. 
 
17 In contrast, Afonso et al. (2021) estimates that over the period 2016–2019, for every dollar change in assets 
held by MMFs, the repo investment of MMFs changed by 0.69. Our estimates apply to behavior on the specific 
date of September 16, 2019, not to average behavior over the previous period. 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 11: Binned Scatter Plot of Change in MMF Assets September 9–16, 2019, and 
Change in Repo Lending on September 16, 2019 
 
Notes: This figure shows a binned scatter plot of change in MMF assets between September 9 and September 
16 and change in  repo lending  on September 9 . A best fit line from the underlying data is also shown, 
corresponding to the regression in Figure 10. 
Sources: Crane’s Money Market Fund Monitor; FRB BONY Tri-Party Repo Collection; OFR Cleared Repo Collection; 
authors’ calculations. 
Intraday Pattern of Rates 
Next, we take a closer look at the trajectory of rates in two segments of the market: (1) the 
tri-party market, which is a non–centrally cleared market mostly composed of banks and 
MMFs lending to dealers, and (2) the FICC-cleared DVP market, which is an interdealer -
brokered market. As shown in Figure 12, starting at about noon on September 16, maximum 
rates spiked to about 4% in tri-party and 8% in DVP. Average rates remained fairly steady at 
about 2% in tri -party, suggesting that only a limited number of firms were impacted by 
higher rates. Volume was relatively low because 70% to 80% of the day’s trades had already 
been negotiated by the time these spikes erupted. 
17
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 12: Intraday Average and Maximum Rates, September 16–18, 2019 
 
Notes: Lines are volume-weighted averages and maximums for 30-minute increments of time. The two vertical 
lines indicate the times when the Federal Reserve announced its intention to provide additional liquidity (9am) 
and the implementation of the liquidity injection (9:55am). 
Sources: FRB BONY Tri-Party Repo Collection; OFR Cleared Repo Collection; authors’ calculations. 
On the morning of September 17, the tri -party average rate rose to 6% and remained high 
for much of the traded volume that day. The two vertical lines in Figure 12 indicate the times 
when the Federal Reserve announced its intention to provide additional liquidity (9am) and 
the implementation of the liquidity injection (9:55am). Note that this injection was intended 
to take place at 9:30 am but was delayed because of  technical difficulties. Following the 
Federal Reserve’s intervention, rates declined substantially in the DVP-brokered market but 
remained elevated in tri -party. By the start of trading on September 18, average rates had 
fallen to about 2%, but the market remained very skittish, as shown by several spikes in both 
the tri-party and DVP segments of the market. 
The intraday pattern of rates highlights two important points. First, rates did not increase 
until the afternoon of September 16 and began increasing in the interdealer market. This 
highlights a general unawareness on the part of dealers about the potential scarcity of funds 
available in the market—otherwise, dealers would have had an incentive to borrow earlier 
in the morning and lend excess funds. Second, there was substantial heterogeneity in the 
response of rates across different segments of the repo market. The dispersion of rates in the 
DVP and tri -party segments on the 16th suggests that although a few market participants 
started to learn that cash supplies were scarce, others did not realize it or were unable to 
lend in response to increased tightness. 
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 21 ---
Intraday Pattern of Lending and Borrowing by Dealers 
Reserves enable banks and bank -affiliated dealers to provide settlement liquidity to other 
market participants and avoid intraday stress on their own balance sheets because of these 
intermediation activities. Although we cannot directly test whether banks may have reached 
their minimum comfortable level of reserves (referred to here as reserve limits, though these 
do not reflect hard regulatory constraints) during the September  stress, the intraday data 
does provide some suggestive evidence that reserve constraints on banks and bank-affiliated 
dealers may have played a contributing role in the repo spike. Figures 13a and 13b show 
cumulative net lending in DVP on September 16 and  17, relative to lending on an average 
day during the previous week, for two categories of dealers: domestic bank -affiliated and 
nonbank-affiliated dealers. 
Figure 13: Intraday Cumulative DVP Net Lending by Dealers, September 16–17, 2019 
a) Domestic Bank Dealer b) Nonbank Dealer 
 
  
Notes: These figures show the cumulative level of DVP net lending by dealers on September 16 and 17 in 30 -
minute increments relative to the same 30 -minute increment on an average day in the previous week for 
domestic, bank-affiliated dealers, and nonbank dealers in billions of US dollars.  
Sources: OFR Cleared Repo Collection; authors’ calculations. 
On the morning of the 16th, domestic bank -affiliated dealers increased net lending. But by 
9am, they had ceased to lend more, and net lending stayed flat even as rates began to rise at 
about noon, which should have provided an additional incentive to lend. On the other hand, 
nonbank dealers (which are not required to hold reserves) did not lend more in response to 
the higher rates and instead borrowed an additional $10 billion. 
Why did bank-affiliated dealers not increase their lending after noon, despite higher rates? 
One possible explanation is dealers’ preference for avoiding daylight overdraft f ees that 
would have come if dealers had borrowed elsewhere to lend into the repo market. However, 
an alternative explanation is that these bank -affiliated dealers may have reached their 
minimum comfortable level of reserves. The intraday pattern of dealers’ lending on the 17th 
19
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 22 ---
suggests that this second explanation is more likely. As on the day before, on the 17th, bank-
affiliated dealers began increasing lending in the morning by $20 billion over the usual levels 
but stopped lending for a short period. It was only after the Fed provided additional liquidity 
at 9:30am that they increased their lending by a further $10 billion. These results are 
consistent with the possibility that some key lenders had reached their minimum 
comfortable level of reserves by the time the Fed intervened. 
For further supportive evidence of the effects of the Fed’s intervention, Figure 14 examines 
the relationship between the amount lent by dealers from 9:30am to 10 am in DVP and the 
amount borrowed from the Fed’s repo facility at 9: 55am. We observe that for every dollar 
borrowed from the Fed, a substantial share was passed through to DVP. That helps to explain 
the cross -sectional increase in lending on the 17th between 9:30am and 10 am. In other 
words, the Fed’s action appears to have  rapidly eased reserve pressure on these bank -
dealers, enabling them to lend more in DVP. Owing to the tight nature of the window around 
the announcement we employ, and our focus on the introduction of this facility, this table 
provides the best identified  evidence to date on the effect of the Federal Reserve’s repo 
operation on the repo market, and show s this facility was effective in increasing lending by 
dealers. 
Figure 14: Regression of Repo Lending by MMFs on Change in MMF Assets, Sept. 17, 2019 
Dependent Variable Change in Repo Lending (9:30–10am) 
Borrowing from Fed (9:55am)  
   Coefficient 0.465 
   t-statistic (2.86) 
R-squared 0.546 
Adjusted R-squared 0.356 
Observations 14 
Notes: This table shows the relationship between the amount lent by dealers from 9:30 am to 10 am on 
September 17, 2019, in DVP and the amount borrowed from the Fed’s repo facility at 9:55am. The t-statistic 
for the test of the null hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to zero is in parentheses, and strongly rejects the 
null. 
Sources: FRBNY Historical Repo Transaction Data; OFR Cleared Repo Collection; authors’ calculations. 
Nonetheless, as Figure 1 2 shows, maximum rates continued to be extremely elevated in 
some segments of the market on September 17  and 18, after the Fed’s intervention. This 
finding suggests that the effective loosening of constraints on bank-affiliated dealers was not 
sufficient to eliminate spikes for several days and that other factors were at work in addition 
to reserve scarcity. 
 
 
20
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 23 ---
V. Market Segmentation and Opacity 
Let us return to the pattern of rates that evolved over the period from September 16 to 
September 18 in the tri -party and DVP segments of the market. Figure 15 shows average 
rates across three different segments of the repo market: (1) the tri-party market, which is a 
non-centrally cleared market mostly comprising banks and MMFs lending to dealers; (2) the 
DVP interdealer-brokered market; and (3) the unbrokered DVP market, which is primarily 
sponsored repo where dealers borrow from MMFs or lend to levered entities such as hedge 
funds. 
Figure 15: Intraday Average Rates by Segment, September 16–18, 2019 
 
Notes: The horizontal line indicates the federal funds target rate. Rates are volume -weighted averages for 30-
minute increments. 
Sources: FRB BONY Tri-Party Repo Collection; OFR Cleared Repo Collection; authors’ calculations. 
One pattern that emerges in these figures is that unbrokered rates such as those paid by 
MMFs did not track interdealer rates throughout September 16th and 17th. A scarcity of 
reserves should, in principle, be reflected across different segments of the repo market as 
interest rates increase to draw funds in from available investors of cash. But on the afternoon 
of the 16th, when cash was scarce in the market and rates began to rise in DVP, MMFs were 
still receiving low returns for investing in repo, as shown by the relatively flat tri-party rates 
through the day. 
One explanation for this heterogeneity in response to rates is the lack of transparency 
between segments of the repo market. More specifically, the interdealer -brokered market 
takes place on transparent screens where prices are updated frequently. Me anwhile, MMFs 
may not have access to these screens but instead may often rely on dealers and other market 
participants to obtain information on the prevailing rate. As a result, for a period of several 
hours, communication between different parts of the ma rket might have been somewhat 
opaque, leading to a temporary dispersion in rates and uncertainty about the root cause. 
21
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 24 ---
MMFs’ lack of transparency into repo rates also helps to explain the behavior of rates on 
September 17. In the interdealer market, rates began to decline following the Federal 
Reserve’s introduction of the repo facility. However, rates in tri-party and sponsored lending 
markets remained high throughout the day and began falling only at about 3:30pm. Thus, 
MMFs were slow not only to learn ab out the tightness in the repo market on the 16th but 
also to react to the decrease in tightness on the 17th. Either MMFs did not know the decrease 
in tightness had occurred, or the early trade activity of MMFs came in advance of the Federal 
Reserve’s announced intervention, which made it too late to reduce the high rates in the 
interdealer segment. 
However, note that alternative market factors might explain for the persistently low rates on 
the 16th and high rates on the 17th in tri-party. As noted in Paddrik, Ramírez, and McCormick 
(2021), tri-party timestamps may not be reliable, as some money market funds and other 
large asset managers may allocate trades among their funds later in the day, then they agree 
to a given rate. Therefore tri -party rates may be  stale. However, we find  no evidence of 
similar problems with the cleared repo data, so the matched pattern of unbrokered rates 
with tri-party rates suggests that the lack of transparency is the more likely explanation. 
These disparities suggest that segme ntation and lack of transparency between different 
parts of the market played an important role in repo rate changes on the 16th and 17th. 
Because most of the repo market activity takes place within the first two-hour window of the 
day, the speed with which information about prices can be disseminated can exacerbate the 
impact of sudden shifts in supply and demand. It is worth considering whether, if clear price 
signals had been transmitted more quickly to MMFs, the MMFs would have been able to lend 
more in to repo and potentially decrease the impact of reserve scarcity. More generally, 
providing greater transparency into the repo market is also crucial to improving price 
discovery and liquidity and preventing future repo spikes. 
VI. Conclusion 
This paper is the first to bring together intraday timing data on the tri -party and cleared 
segments of the repo market for the purpose of studying the causes of the unusually large 
interest rate spike in repo markets in September 2019. We conclude that, in large part, the 
spike resulted from a confluence of factors —large Treasury issuances, corporate tax 
deadlines, and an overall lower level of reserves —that, when taken individually, would not 
have been nearly as disruptive. In addition, we highlight how a lack of informati on 
transmission across repo segments and internal frictions within banks most likely 
exacerbated the spike. These findings are instructive in the context of repo market liquidity, 
demonstrating how the segmented structure of the market can contribute to its fragility. 
  
22
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 25 ---
VII. References 
Adrian, Tobias, Brian Begalle, Adam Copeland, and Antoine Martin. 201 4. “Repo and 
Securities Lending.” In Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling, edited by Markus 
Brunnermeier and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 131–48. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
https://www.nber.org/system/files/chapters/c12515/c12515.pdf 
Afonso, Gara, Marco Cipriani, Adam Copeland, Anna Kovner, Gabriele La Spada, and Antoine 
Martin. 2021. “The Market Events of Mid -September 2019.” Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, Economic Policy Review 27, no. 2: 1–24.  
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/epr/2021/epr_2021_market
-events_afonso.pdf 
Anbil, Sriya, Alyssa G. Anderson, and Zeynep Senyuz . 2020. “What Happened in Money 
Markets in September 2019?”  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Syste m, Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) Notes, February 27, 2020.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/what-happened-in-money-
markets-in-september-2019-20200227.html 
———. 2021. “Are Repo Markets Fragile? Evidence from Septembe r 2019.” Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series  (FEDS), 
August 16, 2021.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/are-repo-markets-fragile-evidence-from-
september-2019.htm 
Anderson, Alyssa G., and Jeffrey W. Huther. 2016. “Modelling Overnight RRP Participation.” 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
(FEDS), February 16, 2016.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/modelling-overnight-rrp-participation.htm  
Andolfatto, David, and Jane E. Ihrig. 2019. “Why the Fed Should Create a Standing Repo 
Facility.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis on the Economy Blog, March 6, 2019.  
https://www.stlouisfed.org/on-the-economy/2019/march/why-fed-create-standing-repo-
facility 
Avalos, Fernando, Torsten Ehlers, and Egemen Eren. 2019. “September Stress in Dollar Repo 
Markets: Passing or Structural?” BIS Quarterly Review (December): 12–14.  
https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1912v.htm 
Baklanova, Viktoria, Adam Copeland, and Rebecca McCaughrin. 2015. “Reference Guide to 
U.S. Repo and Securities Lending Markets.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 
No. 740, September 2015.  
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/staff_reports/sr740.pdf 
  
23
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.

--- Page 26 ---
Barth, Daniel, and R. Jay Kahn. 2021. “Hedge Funds and the Treasury Cash -Futures 
Disconnect.” US Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research Working Paper No. 
21-01, April 2021.  
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3817544 
Clark, Kevin, Adam Copeland, R. Jay Kahn, Antoine Martin, Mark E. Paddrik, and Benjamin 
Taylor. 2021. “Intraday Timing of General Collateral Repo Markets.” Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, Liberty Street Economics, July 14, 2021.  
https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2021/07/intraday-timing-of-general-
collateral-repo-markets/ 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2021. Facilitating the LIBOR Transition (Regulation 
Z). December 7, 2021 (codified at 12 C.F.R. \S 1026).    
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/12/08/2021-25825/facilitating-the-
libor-transition-regulation-z 
Copeland, Adam, Darrell Duffie, and Yilin Yang. 2021. “Reserves Were Not So Ample after 
All.” NBER Working Paper No. 29090, July 2021.  
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w29090/w29090.pdf 
Correa, Ricardo, Wenxin Du, and Gordon Liao. 2020. “U.S. Banks and Global Liquidity.” Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System , International Finance Discussion Paper  No. 
1289, July 2020.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/ifdp/u-s-banks-and-global-liquidity.htm 
D’Amico, Stefania, and N. Aaron Pancost. 2021. “Special Repo Rates and the Cross-Section of 
Bond Prices: The Role of  the Special Collateral Risk Premium.” Review of Finance  26, no. 1: 
117–62. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfab028 
d’Avernas, Adrien, Baiyang Han  and Quentin Vandeweyer. 202 3. “Intraday Liquidity and 
Money Market Dislocations.” University of Chicago, Working Paper, July 2023.  
https://www.adriendavernas.com/papers/repomadness.pdf 
Domm, Patti. 2019. “The Fed’s Fix of the Crucial Repo Lending Market for Banks Will Be Put 
to the Test on Monday.” CNBC, September 27, 2019.  
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/09/27/fed-fix-of-repo-market-to-be-put-to-test-monday-as-
third-quarter-ends.html 
Han, Song, Kleopatra Nikolaou, and Manjola Tase. 2022. “Trading Relationships in Secured 
Markets: Evidence from Triparty Repos.” Journal of Banking & Finance 139 (June): 1–12.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2022.106486 
Hempel, Samuel  J., and R. Jay Kahn. 2021. “Negative Rates in Bilateral Repo Markets.” US 
Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research Brief No. 21-03, September 2021. .  
https://www.financialresearch.gov/briefs/files/OFRBr_21-
03_Negative_Rates_In_Bilateral_Repo_Markets.pdf 
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 27 ---
Kahn, R. Jay, and Luke M. Olson. 2021. “Who Participates in Cleared Repo?”  US Department 
of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research Brief No. 21-01, July 2021.  
https://www.financialresearch.gov/briefs/files/OFRBr_21-01_Repo.pdf 
Kaminska, Izabella. 2019. “Lookout, There’s a Dollar Crunch!” FT Alphaville, September 17, 
2019.  
https://www.ft.com/content/3a266602-1989-3b2e-8bab-eca00d39ae5f 
Paddrik, Mark E., Carlos A. Ramírez, and Matthew J. McCormick. 2021. “The Dynamics of the 
U.S. Overnight Triparty Repo Market.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) Notes, August 2, 2021.   
https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2948 
Smith, Robert Mackenzie. 2019. “All Clear? Structural Shifts Add to Repo Madness.” Risk.net, 
November 5, 2019.  
https://www.risk.net/investing/markets/7133276/all-clear-structural-shifts-add-to-repo-
madness 
Tran, Hung. 2020. “EM Banks Exposed to Stress in FX Swap s, a Spillover from US Repo 
Markets.” Financial Times, January 9, 2020.  
https://www.ft.com/content/5f8237cf-0e90-4f7d-9a0d-e4430f6fc7a1 
Yang, Yilin (David). 2020. “What Quantity of Reserves is Sufficient?” City University of Hong 
Kong, Working Paper, August 20, 2020.   
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3721785 
 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
 
25
Anatomy of the Repo Rate Spikes in September 2019 Kahn et al.