--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 4 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Zoltan Pozsar Lessons Learned: Zoltan Pozsar 
Sandra Ward 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Ward, Sandra (2023) "Lessons Learned: Zoltan Pozsar," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 4, 40-42. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1526 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss4/6 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss4/6

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
Zoltan Pozsar 
By Sandra Ward 
While working as a senior trader and analyst with the Federal Reserve Bank  of New York ’s 
Markets Group in 2008 –11, Zoltan Pozsar became intrigued by the existence of a “shadow 
banking system” involving securitized assets. He dedicated himself to understanding the 
linkages of the then obscure and overlooked asset-backed securities (ABS) market and the role 
it played in keeping markets liquid and functioning. Pozsar’s research laid the groundwork for 
the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, or TALF, which was instrumental in restarting 
the flow of credit during the Global F inancial Crisis. This “Lessons Learned” is based on an 
interview with Pozsar in September 2021. The full transcript can be accessed here.  
Regulators must bring a broad and discerning view to crisis -fighting to be able to 
identify the unexpected and unfamiliar issues and connections that are fueling the fire 
or may spark the next one.   
The Fed eral Reserve implemented many facilities to tackle the liquidity crisis that froze 
financial markets in 2007–09. Some of these facilities were the US dollar swap lines, the Term 
Auction Facility (TAF), the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), the Primary Dealer 
Credit Facility (PDCF), and the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund 
Liquidity Facility (AMLF). Despite these initial interventions, Pozsar recalled policymakers’ 
questioning why credit was “still not flowing to certain places , when [they had] already 
backstopped the banks, the primary dealers, and the money funds.”  
Pozsar came to recognize that focusing on less er-known asset markets was the key to 
mapping out hidden channels through which credit also flowed through the system. He said, 
“Keep in mind, the problems  [of the crisis]  came in large part from the breakdown of the 
shadow banking system, but policymakers st ill didn’t yet have that big, nice mental map of 
how this whole system fits together.” 
The asset -backed securities market created sources of funding for credit  card loans, auto 
loans, and student loans, so it was a key component  to the supply of credit in the broader 
economy. However, the Fed did not regulate this market, it was not well understood, and 
crisis responders had not yet attended to it. He noted: 
A lot of the se [other crisis] facilities were pretty obvious , because you were looking 
out the windo w, literally, at some big banks and insurers across the street. When it 
comes to the ABS securit ies market, it’s kind of amorphous. There ’s a lot of issuers , 
and they’re not always obvious  . . .  The structured investment vehicles [SIVs] and 
asset-backed commercial paper conduits were the most important buyers of asset -
backed securities, and both those markets had blown up.  
This realization led Pozsar to write about the absence of an ABS backstop in an internal 
memo called “The Orphaned Asset Class.” The “paper was the genesis for the idea of the Term 
40

--- Page 4 ---
Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility ,” said Pozsar. The facility was novel for the Fed , 
because it addressed a securities market that it did not regulate  and that had a wide and 
diverse range of issuers and investors. Focusing on the ignored asset class proved critical  
and required creative thinking. Pozsar explained: 
The issue was that the buyer base that traditionally bought these instruments before 
the crisis didn’t exist anymore, so there was nobody to sell to. You needed to create a 
facility that would bring in capital from different places. Then the Fed would provide 
funding. Once the capital and funding are in place, then the market can restart. TALF 
did that —pulling public and private capital toget her and turning that capital into 
balance-sheet capacity to buy credit with funding provided by the Fed. 
Why was it so late in the game that this TALF facility came? Half of the market that 
you needed to have a well -functioning asset-backed securities mark et was already 
gone. The other half didn’t involve systemically important financial institutions as 
issuers that are easy to identify, so this is not as obvious as backstopping Goldman or 
JPMorgan, or whichever company needed to be backstopped. So , it took  time. But 
getting the narrative right that many small nonsystemic parts add up to one systemic 
system that needs to be backstopped was key. 
Pozsar’s work on the TALF was augmented by an additional project of mapping the “shadow 
banking system” and detaili ng its participants and funding network s. The project was 
extremely well received, and when his work was published in 2010 (under the title “Shadow 
Banking”1), it became the most downloaded paper in New York Fed history.  Pozsar’s work 
enhanced the ability of the Fed and other central bankers to understand and begi n to 
regulate the risks posed by the shadow banking system. He talked about the benefits of this 
thinking with regard to tackling the COVID-19 pandemic: 
[T]he system we have today is much cleaner and much better regulated. These 
markets still live on the balance sheets of large financial institutions that are now 
subject to Basel III. You have more capit al, less leverage, and more stable funding. In 
this COVID -19 crisis, not a single bank failed anywhere in the world , so that ’s a 
testament to the success of Basel III as a framework that fortified the system. 
He cites these developments as lasting improvements that helped the Fed effectively address 
the economic impacts of the COVID-19 crisis on the shadow banking markets. 
The government did what was right, and they did it quickly. And on a much bigger 
scale. But again, they knew what to do. In 2008, they didn’t even have a name for it. 
Now we call it “dealer of last resort.” Markets freeze, you step in, and you start making 
markets in a central bank ’s balance sheet. Back then , the response was , “Market 
making? What?” It was very different. It was neve r done before because there  was 
only the discount window. I remember the conversations with people that ran the 
 
1 https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/staff_reports/sr458.pdf  
41
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
discount window. They’d ask, “How are we going to do this? This is not what we were 
set up for.” This was the old school.  
Powerful leadership is a necessary requirement for successful outcomes. 
While a lot of attention is given to the  innovative funding mechanisms and facilities that 
ultimately led to resolving the financial crisis, what gets overlooked is the leadership that 
moved quickly to advance proposed solutions. Said Pozsar,  
My biggest lesson was in leadership. Having two leaders, Tim Geithner as president 
of the New York Fed and Bill Dudley as head of the Markets Group —the two of them 
were an extremely powerful duo . . .  
Having the right people in the right seat at the right time is very important  . . . 
Whatever technical ideas and facilities came out of the Fed from staffers like me, they 
were the ones who championed it at the Board, at the Treasury, in front of Congress.  
Dated: December 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2021-32 
42
Lessons Learned:  Zoltan Pozsar Ward