--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 3 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Sandra Braunstein Lessons Learned: Sandra Braunstein 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale University 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Chute Lynch, Mary Anne and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2023) "Lessons Learned: Sandra Braunstein," Journal 
of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 3, 27-29. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1515 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss3/3 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss3/3

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned  
Sandra Braunstein 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Sandra Braunstein served as the director of the Division of Consumer and Community Affairs 
(DCCA) at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors from 2004 to 2014. Braunstein’s leadership 
resulted in regulatory reforms in the mortgage market and the Truth in Lending Act and Home 
Ownership and Equity Protection Act. She helped assure the smooth transition of consumer pro-
tection responsibilities and appropriate staff from the Federal Reserve System to the new Con-
sumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). After 27 years of service dedicated to consumer 
protection, Braunstein retired in 2014. This “Lesson s Learned” is based on an interview with 
Braunstein in October 2021; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
Regulatory agencies need to break down departmental silos and coordinate across all 
sectors to ensure that the best information is circulated and considered in designing 
effective policy. 
When Sandra Braunstein became director of the Division of Consumer and Community Af-
fairs (DCCA) in 2004, the Fed was focused on financial institutions and banks, she said. But 
her division was very c lose to what was happening in the mortgage markets. They heard 
consumer advocates repeatedly raise alarms about the possibility of systemic risks brewing, 
but because of the structure of the Fed, she found it difficult to get the Fed officers and direc-
tors to pay attention —they didn’t see consumer affairs as a “primary mission” for the Fed. 
As a result, according to Braunstein, “there was not sufficient communication between safety 
and soundness and consumer protection. There was not a recognition of the im pact that 
shoddy consumer protection could have on safety and soundness and the markets as a 
whole.” Braunstein provided the following example:  
When we were writing the new HOEPA [Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act] 
regulations [in 2007], there was a huge internal struggle on coverage. It was part of 
our responsibility to define which loans would be covered by HOEPA regulations. We 
in the consumer area were fighting for very broad coverage. We were being fought by 
economists and safety  and soundness people saying that the coverage we wanted 
would be too broad, and that we should only cover a narrow portion of the mortgage 
market. This is related to what Diane [Thompson , a prominent consumer advocate] 
said about the Fed not thinking that this was a systemic problem; she’s not wrong. At 
that time, the economists and safety  and soundness staff still saw the problems as 
being contained within the subprime markets, and we in DCCA thought a wider swath 
of the mortgage market,  certainly including Alt -A loans, needed to be covered with 
these protections. We would have liked the lower end of the prime market, too.  
Braunstein credits Fed Chair Ben Bernanke with ultimately resolving the struggle in favor of 
DCCA’s point of view.  
27

--- Page 4 ---
It’s hard to know what tangible benefits better interagency coordination might have brought 
to the crisis fight, but Braunstein considers it “vitally important that both sides of regulations 
coordinate and respect each other’s perspectives.” Apparently, others at the Fed agreed with 
her, since changes were implemented after the crisis to promote more communication and 
integration across departments and functions. Some of those changes were made at the 
DCCA, which, among other things, “got much more involved  in looking at the holding com-
pany responsibilities for consumer protection ” and making the officers and boards at the 
holding company level more accountable for “their institutions’ consumer protection pro-
grams, like they take responsibility for the safet y and soundness of their institutions.” An-
other change illustrates the benefits of departmental cross-fertilization to Braunstein:  
The other thing is we moved much more to a risk-focused examination for consumer 
protection. Rather than just going through a checklist of compliance—have they met; 
did they give out the right disclosures; did they do this, do that ?—there’s more of a 
risk focus on the exams in terms of what are the risks here. They are identifying risks 
and looking at those through that consumer protection lens, as opposed to checklists 
about legal and technical compliance.  
Greater diversity of viewpoints and backgrounds among policymakers can fuel more 
effective policy approaches and solutions. 
While very respectful of her former colleagues, Braunstein pointed out that some of the silo-
ing that she encountered could be the result of past practices at the Fed , which generally 
hired a narrow set of economists: 
I felt that the economists at the Fed at that time were all of one mind. Th ey had very 
strict protocols and criteria for hiring an economist, and most of them came from a 
handful of schools that were identified as providing the “right” education for someone 
to work at the Federal Reserve. That ’s problematic , because you need dive rsity of 
viewpoints. Maybe somebody who didn’t have the right education but had a different 
education and a different viewpoint might have identified something different than 
what your 2007 economists from the same school did. My feeling was that they 
needed more diversity, a lot more diversity among the economic part of the Fed in 
order to try to identify issues.  
Among the benefits that Braunstein thinks greater diversity of viewpoints could have 
brought are more engagement with issues in less traditional  ways and considering infor-
mation in more holistic ways.  
It’s very much a data-based organization. They like to make decisions based on what 
they’re seeing in data, and the data comes after stuff happens. That was one of the 
problems with the crisis. When we were fighting the economists about how serious 
this was, it wasn ’t showing up in the data yet. It was anecdotal. It was the Diane 
Thompsons and the consumer people telling us these problems. But, in traditional 
sources of data that the safe ty and soundness people and the economists were look-
ing at, it wasn’t showing up yet. By the time it showed up, it was a major problem.  
28
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Having a greater variety of viewpoints at the table and being heard can help with getting 
ahead of major problems, which is the key to effective crisis-fighting.  
Braunstein also pointed to another factor, of particular importance to the work of the DCCA, 
that diversity of viewpoints might have helped, and on which the government did not score 
highly during the GFC—the interest of the taxpayer. The crisis had several components, and 
Braunstein gives the Fed and government high marks for preventing the collapse of the fi-
nancial system, but she also pointed out that the accompanying housing and foreclosure cri-
ses were not as successfully addressed. Consumers do not have the same voice as banks, she 
said: 
The way our country is currently set up, the banks [corporations] always have the 
edge, and i t’s very difficult to get people in the government to focus sufficiently on 
real people and consumers. We see that not just with financial stuff; we see that with 
childcare, education, health care.  
More diversity of opinions and backgrounds and a willingness to rethink traditional norms 
might result in greater creativity in a ssessing problems and designing more effective solu-
tions. As an example, she pointed to one success of the DCCA, a total rewrite of the mortgage 
and credit card disclosure language:  
The other big thing we did was modifying the disclosures , because the old mortgage 
disclosures were like Greek, and people with advanced degrees couldn’t figure out 
the documents. One of the things that I am most proud of that we did—and the bureau 
is doing it now, but we did it before the bureau existed—is instead of having a bunch 
of lawyers sit in a room and develop financial disclosures, which is how they had al-
ways done it, we started using focus groups. This was not only for mortgage disclo-
sures. We used them for credit cards disclosures, for all financial disclosures. We 
hired professionals who ran focus groups. We drafted options and ran them through 
to see if people understood what they were looking at, and through that method we 
figured out the best way to present information in the mandated disclosures.  I think 
it helped with more transparency for financial markets. 
This in only one example, but Braunstein sa id it embodies an important lesson—regulators 
“need to get out of their little narrow scopes and look holistically at what ’s happening on a 
much broader level, and still keep in mind the impact of [their] decisions and [their] actions 
on real people.” 
Dated: November 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021-39 
29
Lessons Learned: Sandra Braunstein Chute Lynch and Wiggins