--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 5 Issue 2 
2023 
Lessons Learned: Patricia Mosser Lessons Learned: Patricia Mosser 
Manuel León Hoyos 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Hoyos, Manuel León (2023) "Lessons Learned: Patricia Mosser," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 5 : Iss. 2, 
13-16. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1507 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss2/4 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss2/4

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
Patricia C. Mosser 
By Manuel León Hoyos 
During the 2007–2009 Global Financial Crisis (GFC), Patricia Mosser was senior vice president 
in the Markets Group at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York . Mosser oversaw market 
analysis, monetary policy implementation, many crisis -related liquidity facilities, foreign 
exchange operations, and analysis of financial stability and reform . She was also responsible 
for the analytical work of the Markets Group on global financial conditions. Currently, Mosser 
is the director of the masters of public administration program in economic policy management 
and senior research scholar of international and public affairs at the Columbia School of 
International and Public Affairs.  She leads the school’s initiative on central banking and 
financial policy. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview with Mosser held February 14, 
2018; the full transcript can be accessed here.  
The systemic risks to the financial system need thorough and continuous attention. 
Before the GFC, the Federal Reserve and other financial regulators largely concentrated on 
monitoring the stability of individual banks. Not much attention was focused on the 
interconnections between financial institutions or on the stability of the system as a whole. 
The Fed didn’t foresee the systemic risks early enough to prevent the crisis. Mosser said, “We 
didn’t think about risks across the system as carefully as we should have, and what the 
cascading effects could be.”  
Fed officials knew there was the possibility of bank runs a nd panics—they are endemic to 
financial systems. However, the United States had not suffered a crisis of similar magnitude 
since the 1930s, during the Great Depression.  “I think we were complacent in thinking we 
figured out how not to have those anymore, which wasn’t true,” Mosser said.  
She explained that the most important change needed was for regulators to think about the 
financial system much more holistically: “It’s not just banks, or insurance, or asset managers, 
or AIG, or Lehman—it is how the entire system works together and how it can break. ” This 
logic, Mosser continued, has to be extended beyond institutions to markets and instruments: 
We need more thinking through carefully about what the risks are when you look in 
a market and say, “That’s  risky; what is this new instrument ?” But one also has to 
think through carefully all of the instrument’s interconnections to other markets, the 
economy, and other institutional players and then imagine how a cascade of good 
things could happen and how a cascade of bad things could happen.   
Fortunately, Mosser said, there has been a “sea change” in how central bankers and 
regulators all around the world analyze financial risks and financial stability. Now, far more 
attention is paid to systemic risks and interconnections between institutions and the threat 
of contagion, and these matters are discussed on an ongoing basis.  
13

--- Page 4 ---
However, Mosser pointed out that, as valuable as the heightened focus on systemic risk is, a 
related problem still needs more work. She point ed out that not enough attention was paid 
to nonbanking segments of the financial system. Mosser explained, “It didn’t take a genius to 
know that only about one -third of the US financial system had direct access to the Federal 
Reserve for lender of last resort. ” For large bank holding companies like Citigroup and 
JPMorgan, only parts of their organizations had, and have, standing  access to the Fed as 
lender of last resort. For the  standalone investment banks, like Bear Stearns and Lehman  
Brothers, there wasn’t any access. 
The United States is extremely peculiar. This is a legal/regulatory structure problem. 
It is different from the vast majority of countries, certainly large, advanced countries 
with international dealer banks—those firms that make global capital flow go. Except 
for the US, coun tries all have universal banking models, which means you'll have 
different subsidiaries, one focused on retail, one focused on investment banking, etc. 
The European model works like this. Japan works like this. The retail deposit 
subsidiary has deposit insurance, just like the United States. The difference is that the 
entire company has access to a lender  of last resort. It doesn’t matter whether the 
asset sits in the retail bank or in the investment bank; it ’s a single entity. But in the 
United States, only the deposit-taking bank subsidiary, not the bank holding company, 
has access to the discount window. 
Mosser believes that this problem has not really been fixed , and that it is a continuing legal 
restriction that can be “very damaging” in a systemic crisis. 
Planning and testing emergency tools regularly will pay off during a crisis.   
During a crisis, time is extremely valuable. Some of the Fed’s emergency programs took 
weeks or even months to become operational, and some had never been tested. But, Mosser 
said, policy makers “were well aware of the limitations of the Federal Reserve to provide 
liquidity to the entire financial system.” The Fed had been thinking about what could be done 
in a crisis and had designed some initial proposals  for using its emergency  and non -
emergency authorities.   
The problem was not a lack of imagination about what could go wron g; it was either 
not enough urgency or not enough hours in the day to actually put together a fully 
formed emergency facility that might be ready to truly pick up and operationalize off 
the shelf.  
Mosser asserted that preparation is key , and early implementation of emergency facilities 
can decrease the likelihood of runs and panics. One of the biggest lessons learned is “to have 
more of [these emergency programs] sitting on the shelf and go out and test ” them, even if 
they are not going  to be used right away. That way, people know how to use them when 
needed.  
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Mosser believes that these tools can be tested without alarming the markets, by explaining 
“very forthrightly and very publicly” that it is a test and asking firms to participate. This will 
provide valuable knowledge and minimize the risk associated with deploying untested tools 
in the midst of a crisis. 
Credible g overnment guarantees are  particularly potent, even relative to other 
forceful interventions.   
Mosser explained that credible government guarantees are extremely effective tools and will 
trump even very well  designed lender -of-last-resort programs. Mosser said, “Ultimately, 
what stopped the run and truly slowed down the panic in the fall of 2008 were government 
guarantees; it was not the lender-of-last-resort actions.”  
Guarantees support liabilities, which allow the firms to raise funding from market channels 
and not just rely on government -provided liquidity to prop up the institution. Guarantees, 
such as the US Department of the Treasury’s guarantee of money market mutual funds, were 
tremendously valuable in stemming the crisis , said Mosser . Another US government 
guarantee program that received little attention  but was even more effective  was the  
Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program  (TLGP) from the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC). According to Mosser, it  was basically deposit insurance for the entire 
liability side of any financial institution that chose to participate. The FDIC used its systemic 
risk exception provision to guarantee debt for any financial institution , for a fee. The 
program guaranteed enormous amounts of debt , for up to three years . It was “an 
unbelievable guarantee,” Mosser said. “It stopped the run. Full stop. Because it was a credible 
US government guarantee.” 
The challenge of p roviding an effective, broad international lender of last resort still 
hasn’t been resolved.  
One significant element of the crisis was that the liquidity shortage in US dollars outside the 
United States was probably greater than inside the country. The Fed provided some lending 
in US dollars through swap lines with other central banks, as well as some to US arms of 
foreign banking firms. Between the swap lines and lending to domestic banks with a foreign 
parent, Mosser estimated that three-quarters of the dollars lent through the Fed’s programs 
were borrowed by foreign institutions. The Fed was able to man age risk of lending outside 
the United States by lending only to select central banks, which then lent to their domestic 
banks. This helped  the Fed get comfortable with providing dollars abroad to private financial 
institutions the US did not regulate —only indirectly, through foreign central banks  that in 
most cases did regulate such institutions. But it’s not a perfect solution, according to Mosser, 
because the Fed doesn’t know that the central banks are all a pplying the same standard of 
stability for assessing their banks, and some emerging and unstable economies are not good 
candidates for swaps because of underlying economic or political factors. The International 
Monetary Fund helps, but can’t totally fill the gap, said Mosser. 
If you ’re going to have a global financial system with global banks in different 
countries, then they ’re going to have to be able to borrow from several different 
15
Lessons Learned: Patricia Mosser Hoyos

--- Page 6 ---
central banks, not just their home central bank. You better have some a ssurance if 
you’re the host country that this institution coming to you is playing by the same rules 
of the game that your local banks are playing by, otherwise you ’re going to be more 
reluctant to lend to them. 
The problem is in practice, in a crisis, it’s really hard to do. If you think it ’s hard for 
regulators to be honest within their country, it’s even harder for them to be when it’s 
an international conversation. That ’s another issue that hasn ’t really been resolved 
completely. It’s better with the swap lines. The swap lines are a big step in the right 
direction. It could stand some more work at the international level. 
Dated: August 2023 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2019–13 
 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 5 Iss. 2