--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 2 
2024 
Lessons Learned: Guillermo Ortiz Martínez Lessons Learned: Guillermo Ortiz Martínez 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, Policy 
Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, Public 
Administration Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2024) "Lessons Learned: Guillermo Ortiz Martínez," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 
: Iss. 2, 111-114. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1566 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/8 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss2/8

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Guillermo Ortiz Martínez 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Guillermo Ortiz Mart ínez served as undersecretary of finance and public credit in Mexico’s 
federal government from 1988 to 1994 . He  became secretary in December 1994 in the 
administration of Ernesto Zedillo and served until December 1997. As undersecretary, he was 
president of the bank privatization committee and the chief negotiator for Mexico during the 
North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA) negotiations in 1991 t o 1993.  He was 
governor of the Bank of Mexico from January 1998 to December 2009 and is currently partner 
and member of the board of BTG Pactual , a Brazilian investment bank . This Lesson Learned  
summary is based on an interview with Ortiz Martínez held on June 8, 2022; the full transcript 
may be accessed here. 
Regulatory lapses, especially relating to capital adequacy and credit quality, can have 
enormous, long-lasting consequences and create systemic weaknesses. 
On December 1994, as part of a restructuring of the banking system, the Mexican 
government unexpectedly abandoned its policy of anchoring the peso to the US dollar and 
allowed it to float freely, triggering a financial crisis. Faced with a possible default  on its 
dollar-denominated bonds ( tesobonos), Mexico negotiated a $50 billion assistance package 
with the United States  and International Monetary Fund  (IMF). Austerity measures to 
control the crisis caused significant economic hardships, but by 1996 –97, the economy had 
rebounded and Mexico paid back all outstanding obligations.  
The so-called Tequila Crisis had an aspect in common with other crises around the world : 
regulatory failure. The Mexican government had privatized the financial system  after 
liberalizing governing regulations in the years leading up to the crisis. Before privatization, 
Mexican banks financed the government through a regime known as the Encaje Legal, where 
a portion of their deposits was channeled to the government. Afte r privatization, Encaje 
Legal ended, freeing up deposits that banks could use to expand private  sector lending. At 
the same time, other regulatory changes liberalized trade and investment policies. The North 
American Free Trade Agreement, signed in 1992, took effect in 1994 . Emerging markets 
were increasingly popular with international investors, and Mexico became a “darling,”  
leading to large inflows of foreign investment and capital and what has been called a rapid 
and “disorderly” expansion of credit.  
Ortiz Martínez, who was chairman of the privatization committee, acknowledged that the 
privatization process was perhaps executed too quickly without sufficient due diligence. He 
explained:  
My short description is that the buyers did n’t know what they were buying, and we 
didn’t know what we were selling. We didn ’t really have the time to go deeply into 
each bank and find out what the real situation was . Because obviously the overdue 
obligations, when you expand very, very fast, become  much smaller in proportion to 
111

--- Page 4 ---
the growth of credit, until it explodes. Apparently, the banks were very sound because 
the amount of overdue obligations was very small, and credit growth was very fast. 
The banks were very profitable. But of course, that was hiding the underlying credit 
quality of this expansion, which was not correctly overseen. 
In this new era for the Mexican banking system, Ortiz Martínez noted, the crisis was caused 
by a lack of oversight of credit risk and of the credit quality of bank reserves. “We did not pay 
sufficient attention, and that’s an understatement , to the situation of the banking system ,” 
Ortiz Martínez explained:  
We did not really know the credit quality of the portfolio  [on average]. And we did 
not know whether the reserves that the banks were making were sufficient. 
Obviously, they were not sufficient ex -post. What we should have done when 
privatizing the banks should’ve been to devote a lot more resources of the sale of the 
bank to creating reserves for eventual bad loans, and that didn’t happen. 
In the wake of the crisis, many Mexican banks failed or were sold to foreign institutions.  
Even the best policy responses can be undermined by miscommunication and bad 
execution, which can lead to a loss of confidence. 
The foundation of the newly privatized banking system was not healthy enough to weather 
the consequences as investment capital began to flee the country following a series of 
sociopolitical shocks , including the Zapatista uprising in the state of Chiapas a nd the 
assassination of presidential candidate Luis Donaldo Colosio in 1994. This was compounded 
by a doubling of interest rates in the United States from 3% to 6%.  
In December 1994, Ortiz Martínez explained, the minister of finance and the Mexican central 
bank could see international reserves were being depleted and announced a widening of the 
exchange rate band, which didn’t have the desired effect: 
The government decided first to widen the band, and that lasted for about one day—
24 or 48 hours, I don ’t remember exactly how much. The minister of finance at the 
time and the central bank gathered all the Mexican bankers and explained the terms 
of the widening of the band. The mechanics were really blundered because, obviously, 
the bankers took advantage of this information and they started buying dollars, and 
they precipitated an already difficult situation into a crisis. Finally, the band was 
abandoned, and the peso started floating freely, while the finance minister had 
promised investors prior to this episode that the peso was going to remain within the 
band and so on. So that was what triggered (the crisis), the last straw. . . . 
So, when I started in the Finance Ministry, we had no reserves—zero reserves, or very 
close to zero reserves. I don ’t remember the figure, but probably around $26 billion 
in tesobonos that were issued were payable in dollars, and that was the situation. We 
had lost all confidence. Mexico had been a darling of emerging markets, because of 
NAFTA, and the bright future, and everythin g I described. So, it was a very difficult 
start, as you can imagine. 
112
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
A more measured effort could have spared Mexico the worst of the crisis , Ortiz Martínez 
explained:   
The blunder of the government was how they handled devaluation, and the fact that 
they did not adjust the band before. They could have widened the exchange rate band, 
and tightened monetary policy, tightened fiscal policy, in August-September of 1994, 
and they didn’t do it. That would’ve, if not avoided it, attenuated the magnitude of the 
crisis. So, then we start 1995, with no reserves and a bunch of debt. 
A credible, consistent policy framework creates the conditions to build economic 
resilience that will aid the financial system in surviving a crisis. 
New in office, President Zedillo faced a difficult political situation that required negotiating 
with Congress, unions, and other sectors. Mexico experienced a 7% contraction in GDP in 
1995 and a sharp drop in real wages as inflation shot up and wages stagnated due to 
austerity. The crisi s and the countermeasures extracted a political cost; the Partido 
Revolucionario Institucional ( the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or  PRI) lost big in the 
next midterm elections and in 1997 lost control of the Congress for the first time in 70 years. 
But the economy bounced back almost wholly, and Mexico regained access to international 
markets in the following year. Mexico learned to live with the floating exchange rate and put 
a monetary policy  in place consistent with the floating rate, and a mechanism of inflation -
targeting at the central bank, said Ortiz Martínez. 
The government was able to replenish international reserves and pay back the US loan and 
other aid ahead of schedule. “So , in that  sense, the program was very successful,” Ortiz 
Martínez said. The speed with which the program’s aims were delivered calmed the waters 
and avoided social disruption, he said. 
In the aftermath of the crisis, it was clear that tighter monetary and banking p olicy would 
have helped forestall the worst effects. The relative stability of the Mexican economy through 
later crises, such as the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 and the disruption of the COVID -19 
pandemic, has shown that a credible, consistent policy f ramework helps build a resilient 
system. During the pandemic lockdown, Mexico suffered some hardship; “the shock was very 
large but very short,” he said. 
The development of this symbiosis between the existing monetary and fiscal policy regimes 
derives directly from the lessons of the 1994–95 crisis intervention, and it has really helped 
the economy going forward, Ortiz Martínez explained. 
Those are the two ingredients that are fundamental for economic stability: having a 
sound banking system  . . .  and a con sistent framework, a consistent, credible policy 
framework. Because you ’re always going to be facing shocks, like COVID and you -
name-it. 
The point is to increase the resilience of the economy, and the banking system. And if 
you have a set of policies, good regulation, good capital adequacy, and so on, the 
capacity to absorb shocks is much greater than if you don’t. It’s as simple as that. 
113
Lessons Learned: Guillermo Ortiz Martínez Cardona

--- Page 6 ---
Dated: July 2024 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022-06 
114
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2