--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 1 
2024 
Lessons Learned: Júlia Király Lessons Learned: Júlia Király 
Matthew A. Lieber 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Lieber, Matthew A. (2024) "Lessons Learned: Júlia Király," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 1, 
616-618. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1552 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss1/24 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss1/24

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Júlia Király 
By Matthew A. Lieber 
Júlia Király was deputy governor of the National Bank of Hungary  (Magyar Nemzeti Bank, or 
MNB) from 2007 to 2013. A financial economist serving on MNB’s advisory board in the 1990s, 
Király helped formulate and adapt Western banking frameworks for Hungary’s economic 
transition away from socialism . As deputy governor, she oversaw Hungary’s emergency 
response to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). A professor of finance at the International 
Business School Budapest, Király is the author of Hungary and Other Emerging EU Countries 
in the Financial Storm, published in 2020. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview with 
Király on June 7, 2022. The full transcript can be accessed here. 
The central bank should have the leading role as the macroprudential regulator and 
supervisor for the banking system , so it can manage systemic risks and financial 
stability. 
For Király, the fact that the central bank should lead the way was an important lesson that 
Hungary learned from the crisis. Compared to other small independent -currency countries 
like Ireland and Iceland, in 2008, Hungary had a much less developed and smaller  financial 
industry, which, according to Király, should have made it less vulnerable to the GFC.  
However, before the crisis, Hungary’s Ministry of Finance was responsible for regulations 
relating to the banking system, and prudential supervision over banks was the responsibility 
of another agency, the Financial Supervisory Authority. One problem with this segmentation 
of authorities, according to Király, was that the central bank could not change practices that 
it thought were contributing to instability, such as mortgages denominated in Swiss francs 
rather than local forint. From 2002, foreign currency lending rose dramatically; specifically, 
Swiss franc –denominated household debt would become the most damaging exposure 
across the nation.   
Király and others at the MNB saw the vulnerability but did not have the regulatory authority 
to step in. Several weeks after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, “almost all the Hungarian 
financial markets stopped.” Like many similar countries, said Kir ály, Hungary was facing a 
tremendous liquidity crisis, but one much worse than that of its peers. 
On the 9th of October, the FX swap market collapsed, which was the funding market 
for the banks, and the government bond market stopped. The Treasury could not 
issue new papers. And of course, the stock exchange collapsed as well, where one of 
the major listings is the biggest Hungarian bank’s stock, the OTP, and the OTP 
collapsed. 
It was a liquidity shock, which really attacked not only the government paper market, 
not only the government bond market, but the banking market as well. In the first 
616

--- Page 4 ---
day, we had to provide liquidity for the banks, and what was difficult [was that we did 
not have to provide liquidity] in Hungarian forint, but in FX. 
That is the big difference between Hungary, Romania, Serbia, and other countries, 
that the liquidity crisis was not in local currency. [With] local currency, we had no 
problem on [any] of the m arkets. We had [a] liquidity problem in foreign currency. 
That’s why we say the famous Eichengreen type of “original sin” [borrowing in a 
foreign currency and accumulating a currency mismatch] was committed by us. That 
is why we applied to the [European Central Bank (ECB)] for a swap line, for a euro-
forint swap line. 
The ECB originally turned down the MNB’s request for a swap line but later granted it a repo 
line (accepting euro-denominated securities instead of forint s for euros). The country was 
also able to negotiate assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and European 
Commission, which helped it through a recession.  
According to Király, Hungary was a “quite healthy” economy at the time, and its issues “were 
mainly liquidity problems and n ot solvency problems. ” But, she continued, “liquidity 
problems in FX are significantly different from liquidity crisis in local currency. And that ’s 
why sometimes it looks like a solvency problem.” Despite this, no Hungarian banks went 
bankrupt during the crisis, and in 2011 Hungary reformed its system of banking regulation 
to integrate macroprudential regulation and supervision of banks into the cen tral bank’s 
authority.  
Given the interconnectedness of financial systems and markets, no country can solve 
a global financial crisis by itself: Cooperation, coordination, and creative thinking are 
required.  
The response that ultimately resolved Hungary’s  liquidity crisis of 2008 was a rescue 
package to which the IMF and the European Union  agreed. However, by early 2009, a new 
round of financial diplomacy was required, and not just for Hungary. As Király put it,  
At the beginning of 2009, it was the crisis  of Central and Eastern Europe, not only of 
Hungary. It was the time when Western countries, especially Eurozone countries, 
turned inward, and the governments of the Western countries [forbade] their banks 
to help their Eastern subsidiaries.    
The situation was resolved by what came to be called the Vienna Initiative. The initiative was 
a framework among public and private parties, governments, commercial banks, central 
banks, and international institutions that “sat around the table” to resolve what was by then 
a second liquidity and FX crisis for most of Central and Eastern Europe.  
According to Király, some of the parent banks in the Western countries did not want to let 
their subsidiaries go through a liquidity crisis or go bankrupt. These interests wer e key in 
achieving the cooperation of the Group of 20 (G-20) countries. After much debate, they finally 
said they would cooperate and show solidarity toward countries in crisis, and they 
617
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
recognized “that it’s in the interest of all the countries not to let  the vulnerable countries be 
underwater,” said Király.  
Specifically, the Vienna Initiative included a commitment by the large Western banks not to 
pull capital from their subsidiaries in countries where the IMF provided support. Kir ály 
credited the G -20 and ECB President Christine La garde for the enlightened turn in 
international financial crisis response. And Király views the ECB’s quick provision of  euro 
liquidity to non -euro members of the European Union in March 2020 , as the COVID -19 
pandemic hit, as a legacy of this new cooperative thinking.  
Dated: March 2024 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022-13 
 
618
Lessons Learned: Júlia Király Lieber