--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 4 
2024 
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 
Carey K. Mott 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Léo Brougher 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, and 
Methods Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Mott, Carey K. and Brougher, Léo (2024) "International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 4, 82-115. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1601 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss4/3 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss4/3

--- Page 3 ---
International Monetary Fund: Short-Term  
Liquidity Line, 20201 
Carey K. Mott2 and Léo Brougher3 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
December 17, 2024 
Abstract 
As the COVID -19 pandemic spread in March 2020, g lobal financial conditions tightened 
considerably. In response, global reserve currency-issuing countries extended bilateral swap 
lines to select countries. Strong demand for US dollar liquidity among emerging markets led 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to introduce the Short-Term Liquidity Line (SLL) on 
April 15, 2020. The SLL functioned as a swap lending facility. Unlike other IMF liquidity tools, 
the SLL was a revolving credit line that allowed countries to repeatedly draw funds and make 
repayments, with each repayment restoring access up to the approved limit across SLL 
arrangements. Its purpose was to enable countries with relatively strong fundamentals 
facing moderate, short-term balance-of-payments needs to access short-term credit without 
the conditionality or stigma of other IMF liquidity programs.  Qualified IMF members could 
access Special Drawing Rights (SDR) (up to 145% of their quota) through the SLL with a 12-
month repurchase period. Chile was the sole IMF member to enter an SLL arrangement , in 
May 2022. The IMF offered the Banco Central de Chile USD 3.5 billion (145% of Chile’s IMF 
quota), which it never drew upon. Only three months after entering the SLL, Chile exited and 
returned to the Flexible Credit Line (FCL),  a larger IMF credit facility to which it had access 
in the two years immediately preceding its SLL arrangement , citing rapidly deteriorating 
macroeconomic conditions. In 2023, the IMF reviewed its precautionary toolkit —including 
the SLL, the FCL and the Precautionary and Liquidity line— and found that the SLL remained 
attractive for countries needing revolving credit lines but had been underused because of its 
relatively low access limit , the rise of tail risks associated with large balance of payment 
needs connected to the pandemic, and the lack of awareness among qualifying countries. To 
address these issues, the IMF proposed raising the SLL’s access limit to 200% of SDR quota 
and allowing simultaneous use with the FCL, enabling countries to respond more flexibly to 
diverse external risks. 
Keywords: currency swap lines, International Monetary Fund,  liquidity, S pecial Drawing 
Rights  
 
1 This case study is part of the Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering International Monetary Fund programs. Cases are available from the Journal of Financial 
Crises at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss4/. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
3 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
82

--- Page 4 ---
Overview 
Global financial conditions tightened 
considerably in March 2020  as the COVID-
19 pandemic spread across the globe , 
leaving many emerging market economies 
without sufficient liquidity amid increased 
demand for US dollar s and other global 
reserve currencies. On April 15, 2020, the 
International Monetary Fund ( IMF) 
introduced the Short -Term Liquidity Line  
(SLL) to help member countries that were 
in a strong fiscal condition and had a track 
record of meeting liquidity needs 
effectively to meet moderate, short -term 
balance-of-payments needs without the 
conditionality or stigma of other IMF 
liquidity programs (IMF n.d.b; IMF 2020a). 
The SLL offered a renewable 12 -month 
credit line up to 145% (adjusted to 200% in 
2023) of an IMF member’s quota . Unlike 
other IMF programs, it was a revolving 
facility, meaning that  countries could 
repeatedly draw funds and make 
repayments, with each repayment 
restoring access up to the approved limit 
across SLL arrangements  (IMF n.d.c) . 
(Member quotas represent the capital each 
member country contributes to the IMF 
and are the IMF’s main source of funding . 
They are denominated in Special Drawing 
Rights (SDR), an international reserve asset 
that the IMF create d to supplement 
member countries’ reserves [IMF 2022e]).  
As with other IMF facilities, the Fund acted 
as an intermediary between creditors 
(usually, IMF member countries that issue 
reserve currencies ) and borrowers in a 
swap arrangement. SLL borrowers could 
use the SLL to swap their currency for an 
equivalent am ount of SDRs or another 
member’s currency, then repurchase their 
currency at a later date . The creditor 
received a liquid claim on the IMF ; the 
borrower paid the SDR interest rate via the 
Key Terms 
Purpose: To enable countries with relatively strong 
fundamentals facing moderate, short-term balance-
of-payments needs to access revolving, short-term 
credit without the conditionality or stigma of other 
IMF liquidity programs 
Participating 
Parties 
IMF, Chile 
Type of Program Other  
Currencies 
Involved 
IMF members purchased SDRs 
or another member’s currency 
in exchange for an equivalent 
amount (in SDR terms) of its 
own currency  
Launch Date April 15, 2020  
End Date Each arrangement would end 
12 months after initiation and 
successor arrangements can 
be approved if the member 
country continues to qualify 
and has balance of payment 
needs  
Date of First Usage The SLL was unused  
Interest Rate and 
Fees 
The SDR rate was 25 basis 
points (bps) on April 15, 2020; 
there were various origination 
fees (> 29 bps)  
Amount 
Authorized 
Chile: USD 3.5 billion (145% of 
quota)  
Peak Usage 
Amount and Date 
Chile: unused 
Downstream Use, 
Application of 
Funds 
Not applicable 
Outcomes No IMF members drew on an 
SLL arrangement  
Notable Features Unique among IMF programs, 
the SLL was a revolving facility 
targeting countries with 
relatively strong fiscal 
positions  
83
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
IMF. The claim would be settled at the time of repurchase. Any local currency the borrower 
provided to the IMF as part of the SLL transaction would be in addition to the borrower’s 
quota (IMF 2018d, 23). Typically, a borrower tapped an IMF lending facility to access global 
reserve currencies: the US dollar, euro, Japanese yen, Chinese renminbi, and British pound 
sterling. The borrower can use its SDRs as part of its foreign exchange reserves or exchange 
them for freely usable currencies. This can be done through voluntary agreements with other 
members or, in some cases, through a mandatory plan for countries with strong external 
positions. Additionally, SDRs can be used for authorized operations, such as loans, paying 
obligations, and IMF -related transaction s, including loan repayments and quota increases  
(IMF 2021e).  
The IMF was able to swiftly  implement the SLL because it copied design features from  its 
existing Flexible Credit Line (FCL) and a proposed but not executed program that was to be 
called the Short-Term Liquidity Swap (SLS)  that IMF staff had proposed in 2017.  The SLS, 
was to be a revolving credit line that would fill a post-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) funding 
gap between so-called “systemic” and “gatekeeper” economies  (IMF 2020a) . These are 
countries that the IMF identified as either substantial contributors to global markets through 
trade or finance  (systemic), or countries especially conducive to shock transmission and 
crisis spillover  (gatekeepers) respectively (IMF 2016). The SLS proposal failed to get the 
necessary support from IMF directors and was never implemented (IMF 2020a). 
Meanwhile, the qualification criteria for countries under the SLL were the same as the IMF’s 
FCL. Both the SLL and FCL were available to members demonstrating strong economic 
fundamentals and policies, sufficient to give the IMF “confidence that the member will 
respond appropriately to the special balance-of-payments difficulties that it could 
encounter” (IMF 2020a, 16). However, the SLL provided smaller amounts of liquidity than 
the FCL, with credit initially made available to eligible countries only up to 145% of quota on 
a revolving basis. For a list of countries meeting these conditions, see Key Design Decision 
No. 7, Eligible Institutions. Established in March 2009, the FCL extended credit tranches for 
one-to-two-year arrangements with a three-to-five-year repurchase period (IMF 2020a; IMF 
2022c).  
The SLL was intended to  enable the “more efficient allocation” of IMF resources. The lower 
access of this facility, its role as a vehicle to allow countries to exit the higher-access FCL, and 
the strategic benefits of additional precautionary support to IMF members were intended to 
offset the credit and reputational risks to the IMF that could result from a deterioration of a 
member’s fundamentals or policies during an arrangeme nt (IMF 2020a) . Moreover, IMF 
officials cited opposition to the issuance of SDRs from prominent member countries , 
including the United States , as a motivation for the creation of the SLL . As a lower access 
program initially estimated to serve 10 to 20 countries with up to USD 50 billion in demand, 
the SLL provided lower balance sheet exposure for the IMF than the issuance of additional 
SDRs which, with one exception, were allocated to all members relative to each country’s 
IMF member quota (Shalal 2020). 
Chile had entered the COVID-19 crisis in a strong fiscal position . However, given the large 
stock of domestic securities held by nonresidents, the country was exposed to significant 
84
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 6 ---
risks in the event of a prolonged flight to safety  (IMF 2020b; IMF 2021c) . To improve its 
liquidity position , the Banco Central de Chile (BCC) purchased USD 7.4 billion in 
international reserves. Chile also had backup liquidity available through swaps , including 
USD 8 billion that was available through a pre-existing4 Chinese renminbi-Chilean peso swap 
line with the People’s Bank of China (BCC 2020; IMF 2022b; BCC 2022b); beginning on March 
31, 2020, it could access US dollar liquidity through the Federal Reserve’s temporary Foreign 
and International Monetary Authorities (FIMA) repo facility. 5 The BCC also signed a two -
year, USD 23.9 billion FCL arrangement 6 (1,000% of q uota) with the IMF  in May 2020  to 
bolster its liquidity position (BCC 2022b; IMF 2022b). This line was never drawn upon (IMF 
2022f).  
Supported by the availability of this  additional liquidity, Chile’s fiscal and monetary 
authorities undertook a sizeable domestic response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including a 
USD 34 billion (13% of GDP) fiscal package  (IMF 2021c). By 2021, the BCC had stood up a 
suite of lending facilities that enabled commercial banks to channel funds to small businesses 
affected by the pandemic. That year, Chile also received SDRs equal to USD 2.3 billion in the 
IMF’s general SDR allocation, 7 leading to a 424% increase in its SDR holdings  (IMF 2022g). 
In February 2022, the BCC agreed to join a regional financing arrangement, the Fondo 
Latinoamericano de Reservas, which granted it access to USD 1. 3 billion (BCC 2022b; IMF 
2022b).  
On May 20, 2022, as its FCL arrangement was set to expire, Chile became the first and only 
member to enter into an SLL arrangement , which the IMF viewed as an offramp from the 
larger FCL arrangement. Chile’s SLL arrangement was for USD 3.5 billion (145% of its quota) 
(IMF 2022a). While Chile emerged  from the worst of the COVID-19 crisis with its external 
position bolstered (see Figure 1 for a graph of Chile’s economic recovery compared with its 
peers), in late 2022, Chile faced a major balance-of-payments shock as the price of copper, 
its main export , dropped sharply (IMF 2023b) . This, combined with inflation, increased 
commodity market volatility, and a stronger US dollar, caused significant economic 
uncertainty and foreign exchange volatility . The SLL was insufficient to address Chile’s 
evolving risks (see Figure 2 for a graph illustrating the increase in Chile ’s government bond 
yield). On August 24, 2022, Chile requested a cancellation of its SLL, in favor of a new two -
 
4 The BCC and People’s Bank of China originally signed a three-year swap line in 2015, which they renewed for 
another three-year term in 2018. In July 2020, the two central banks agreed to increase the swap line from USD 
3.1 billion to USD 7.1 billion (Perks, et al. 2021; Reuters 2020).  
5 The BCC’s functional limit at the FIMA facility was the total amount of US Treasury securities it held at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The BCC could increase its US dollar reserves by selling US Treasury 
securities to the Federal Reserve System Open Market Account and agreeing to repurchase them at the maturity 
of the repo agreement at a premium to the market rate. For more information on the FIMA repo facility, see 
Kelly (2023).  
6 This marked the first time that Chile had approached the IMF in 3 0 years; its last Standby Arrangement was 
in 1989–1990 (IMF 2022f).  
7 Announced on August 2, 2021, to address the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the SDR 456 billion (USD 650 
billion) allocation was the fourth-ever general allocation and the largest , almost trebling the next largest that 
had been made during the GFC. SDRs are a form of unconditional (or “concessional”) liquidity to IMF member 
nations, similar to a capital injection or grant that among other uses, may be exchanged for reserve currencies.  
For more information on the IMF’s COVID-19 SDR allocation, see Arnold (2024).  
85
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 7 ---
year, USD 18.5 billion (800% of quota) FCL arrangement—about USD 5.5 billion smaller than 
its 2020 FCL8 (IMF 2022c). The IMF swiftly approved this switch (see Figure 3 for a summary 
of Chile’s IMF programs) . At the  time, Chile was also engaged in foreign exchange 
intervention that it anticipated could use up to USD 10 bill ion of its international reserves 
(BCC 2022c).  
Figure 1: Chile’s Economic Recovery from  COVID-19 Was Superior to its Peers, 
Allowing it to Unwind its FCL in May 2022 
 
Source: IMF 2022b. 
Figure 2: Chilean Economic Conditions Deteriorated in May 2022 
 
Source: IMF 2022c.  
  
 
8 On June 25, 2022, Chile entered into a RMB 15 billion liquidity agreement with the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS), which allowed the BCC to access US dollars against its holdings of Chinese renminbi (BIS 
2022). The BCC’s renminbi holdings equated to USD 2.1 billion in 2020; it is not clear whether the BCC has 
drawn under this BIS arrangement (BCC 2020).  
86
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 8 ---
Figure 3: Chile’s IMF Arrangements, 2020–2022 
Commitment Date of 
Arrangement Expiration Date 
Amounts (SDR millions) 
Approved  Drawn  
FCL Aug. 29 2022 Aug. 28, 2024 13,954 0 
SLL May 20, 2022 Aug. 28 2022 2,529 0 
FCL May 29, 2020 May 19, 2022 17,443 0 
Note: Chile cancelled its SLL after only three months, observing greater market uncertainty and nascent 
inflationary pressures that motivated it to enter into another FCL arrangement, which offered more credit.  
Source: IMF 2023a. 
Despite only one brief arrangement with Chile, the IMF claimed the SLL had several benefits, 
particularly for countries unable to access US dollar liquidity through the New York Federal 
Reserve’s FIMA repo facility. From an IMF member’s perspective, the SLL was cheaper than 
the FCL  if the member tapped it  once and on a precautionary basis (the surcharges of a  
renewed SLL arrangement put it on par with the FCL). Following the G FC, the I MF created 
several credit facilities that drew on its General Resources Account (GRA) , an emergency 
lending account for IMF members with strong fundamentals .9 These were the FCL, Rapid 
Credit Facility (RCF), and Precautionary and Liquidity Line (PLL) (see Figure 4). Like the 
other post-GFC GRA facilities, the SLL also made SDRs available to the member immediately, 
rather than through scheduled disbursements (co mmon in one of the IMF’s oldest credit 
arrangements, the Stand-by Arrangement, or SBA). From the IMF’s perspective, the SLL was 
a lower-access, shorter-term alternative to its other lending facilities, with higher eligibility 
standards; therefore, it was less risky in some respects . For more information on  the risks 
posed by the SLL, see Key Design Decision No.13, Balance Sheet Protection.  
Despite these benefits, countries chose to tap  IMF facilities other than the SLL  throughout 
the COVID-19 crisis. Countries with strong fundamentals preferred the other GRA facilities. 
Countries that were not eligible for the SLL drew on facilities funded through the Poverty 
Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT), including the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) and SBAs10 
(see Figure 4) (IMF n.d.b) . The RCF and PLL, low -medium access facilities with less 
restrictive conditions established in 2011, also remained available to countries ineligible for 
or disincentivized from using the SLL. Throughout the crisis, the  IMF reiterated its 
fundamental role as global lender of last resort, noting its resources were only to be used as 
necessary (IMF 2021f). 
  
 
9 The PRGT is the IMF’s other major account belongs to the on -lending program for low -income members. In 
2022, the IMF introduced  the Resilience and Sustainability Trust (RST),  a third major account to help its 
members meet balance of payments needs.   
10 The facilities discussed draw from the IMF’s GRA. A slew of similar facilities was available to low -income 
countries through the PRGT and the RST. For more information on the IMF’s funding distinction, see Key Design 
Decision No. 13, Balance Sheet Protection. 
87
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 4: Lending from the IMF’s General Resources Account during COVID-19    
Post-GFC GRA Facilities 
 
Credit Facility Flexible Credit Line Short-Term Liquidity 
Line 
Precautionary & 
Liquidity Line 
Rapid Financing 
Instrument 
 Abbr. FCL SLL PLL RFI 
 
Est. 2009 2020 2011(b) 2011 
 
Term Short to medium Short Short to medium Short to medium 
 
Purpose Credit tranches to address all balance-of-payments needs, potential or actual 
 
Conditions Very strong ex ante macroeconomic 
fundamentals, economic policy framework, 
and track record 
Sound policy 
frameworks, external 
position, and market 
access, including 
financial sector 
soundness 
Efforts to solve 
balance-of-payments 
difficulties (may 
include prior actions) 
 
Phasing and 
Monitoring 
Approved access available up-front 
throughout the arrangement period(c)  
Large front-loaded 
access, subject to 
semiannual reviews 
Outright purchases 
without full-fledged 
program or reviews  
Access Ad hoc Medium Medium Low 
Access Limits 
(% of Quota) 
Annual N/A 145%(f) 250% 37.5% 
Cumulative N/A N/A 500% 75% 
Amount 
Committed 
(Outstanding) 
USD Billion(a) 
2019 84.7 (N/A) 0 3.0 (N/A) N/A (1.3) 
# 2 0 1 - 
2020 71.4 (N/A) 0 0 (2.9) N/A (2.7) 
# 2 0 0 - 
2021 118.2 (5.4) 0 2.7 (2.2) N/A (22.3) 
# 4 0 1 - 
2022 91.8 (5.0) 3.5 (0.0)(d) 2.5 (2.0) N/A (22.2) 
# 4 1  1 - 
Charges 
Charges Rate of Charge(e) Rate of Charge Rate of Charge Rate of Charge 
Use Surcharge 
> 187.5% 200 bps 200 bps 200 bps 200 bps 
Duration 
Surcharge 
100 bps for > 36 
months N/A 100 bps for > 36 
months 
100 bps for > 36 
months  
Repayment 
Schedule 3.25–5 3–5 3.25–5 3.25–5 
 
Installments  Quarterly N/A Quarterly Quarterly 
(a) The statistics presented are cumulative and include the total amount of committed (outstanding) funds as of 
the reporting of these statistics. All dates as of last week in April.  
(b) The PLL replaced a similar facility, the Precautionary Credit Line, in November 2011.  The IMF executive 
board supported the elimination of the PLL in 2017; nevertheless, it continued operating through 2022.  
(c) Two-year FCLs are subject to a midterm review after one year. 
(d) The SLL arrangement with Chile is included here for illustrative purposes; it laste d only three months and 
had been converted to the FCL by the date the IMF reported these statistics.  
(e) According to the IMF, the “normal rate of charge” is equivalent to the SDR rate plus a fixed margin of 100 bps.  
(f) In 2023, the IMF increased the SLL access limit to 200%. 
Note: Figure 4 summarizes facilities that draw on the GRA and excludes low -income financing arrangements 
that draw from the PRGT.  
Sources: IMF 2018d; IMF 2019; IMF 2020d; IMF 2021d; IMF 2022d ; IMF n.d.b.  
88
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 10 ---
Summary Evaluation 
The SLL had only one participant, Chile, which exited its arrangement just three months after 
requesting it, given that its greater credit needs were more appropriate for the higher-access 
FCL arrangement. The FCL had no prescribed access limit, and access was tailored to the 
members’ needs (IMF 2022a; IMF 2022c; IMF 2023b).  
The SLL was based on a rejected IMF staff proposal for an SLS in 2017 (IMF 2020a). The SLS 
failed at that time to get the necessary support due to reservations among some members of 
the IMF’s executive board of directors. Directors expressed concerns about the possibility 
that a member’s central bank could be the sole signatory  for the SLS , the absence of clear 
expectations around exiting an SLS agreement, and the possible stigma of rejected 
applications (IMF 2017a; IMF 2020a) . Ultimately, aside from keeping all applications 
confidential, the SLL’s design was nearly identical to the SLS proposal (BCC 2022c; IMF 
n.d.b). As adopted, the SLL did not require both parties to sign the agreement , but Chile’s 
central bank and finance ministry both signed the SLL agreement (BCC 2022a).  
In justifying the SLL, the IMF stated that the “persistent failure to fill [the] well-recognized 
gap in the toolkit would continue to undermine the Fund’s crisis -prevention objectives and 
risk damaging the reputation of the Fund” (IMF 2020a, 13). The Fund hoped that countries 
with strong fundamentals , but facing potential, moderate, s hort-term balance of payment 
needs would find the SLL attractive due to the lack of conditionality and stigma  (IMF n.d.c; 
IMF 2020e).   
Chile’s decision to exit its SLL arrangement in August, just three months after initiating it, 
and switch to the higher -access FCL resulted in an SDR 11.5 billion  (450%) increase in the 
IMF’s commitment to Chile, deemed a “significant but manageable impact” on the Fund’s 
liquidity position (IMF 2022c). Per CE Noticias Financieras, a Latin American financial news 
agency, this increase in the FCL arrangement for Chile, relative to the size of Chile’s economy, 
was proportional to the IMF’s 2018 SBA of SDR 35.4 million (USD 50 billion) to Argentina  
which made the country the IMF’s top debtor (CE Noticias Financieras 2022; IMF 2018c). 
In 2023, the IMF conducted a review of its precautionary toolkit, including the SLL, FCL, and 
PLL. According to t his review, IMF member countries  said in a survey that they found the 
SLL to be an attractive instrument, particularly due to its revolving nature. Member countries 
also valued the feature that the SLL was based on the extension of an offer from the IMF, 
rather than a country requesting it—a factor that minimized stigma from its use. The review 
concluded that the limited use of the SLL was due to factors such as its relatively low access 
limit of 145% of quota, which is less than that of typical bilateral swap lines (BSL) available 
to emerging markets, and the COVID -19 pandemic, which created significant balance-of-
payments risks better suited to the FCL. Additionally, the SLL’s novelty meant that some 
qualifying countries may not have been fully aware of its benefits. To address these issues, 
the IMF proposed raising the SLL’s access limit to 200% of quota, aligning it more close ly 
with the scale of BSLs , and enhancing its ability to meet evolving member needs, while still 
targeting moderate, short -term balance-of-payments issues. Another significant change is 
the proposal to allow concurrent use of the SLL and FCL, enabling count ries to access both 
89
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 11 ---
instruments simultaneously if they meet the criteria and face external risks warranting both 
moderate and tail-risk coverage. This concurrent usage option would help countries respond 
to a broader range of shocks by combining the shorter-term liquidity support of the SLL with 
the FCL’s extended access and terms. Together, these two reforms aim to enhance the 
effectiveness and attractiveness of the SLL and FCL by increasing flexibility, ensuring robust 
qualification criteria, and enabling smoother augmentation procedures . (IMF 2023b; IMF 
n.d.c). Following the review, the IMF made changes to the SLL, increasing the access limit to 
200% of a country ’s quota and permitting its concurrent use with the FCL provided that 
external risks and potential balance-of-payments needs justify such measures (IMF n.d.c). 
  
90
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 12 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose and Type: Through bilateral swaps with the IMF, the SLL offered liquidity 
on a revolving basis for member countries with strong fundamentals that were 
experiencing moderate, short-term balance-of-payments pressures from external 
developments and capital account pressures without conditionality and stigma.   
The COVID -19 pandemic severely disrupted global financial markets. Many countries 
suffered significant capital outflows and short-term liquidity pressures. The IMF created the 
SLL to fill a gap in its liquidity toolkit. Unlike the IMF’s other programs, the  SLL targeted 
countries with strong fundamentals that wanted to avoid the stigma or conditionality 
associated with IMF programs. The IMF designed the  SLL as a precautionary revolving and 
renewable backstop for IMF members with “very strong fundamentals and  policy track 
records” facing moderate, short-term balance-of-payments needs (IMF 2020a; IMF 2022a). 
By offering a revolving purchase -repurchase agreement , the IMF provided  liquidity to 
members expecting short-term capital account and reserves pressures owing to volatility in 
international markets. The IMF said it did not intend the program to assist countries whose 
balance-of-payments needs had been caused by their own domestic policy decisions. The SLL 
was available to members who could reasonably expect these balance-of-payments issues to 
be limited in scale and impact and required nothing more of the member than finetuning its 
monetary and exchange rate policies. The SLL aim ed to reduce the impact of disruptive 
liquidity events and minimize the risk of shocks evolving into deeper crises and spilling over 
to other IMF members. It also served as a complement to the FCL, which offered larger loans 
(IMF 2020a).  
2. Part of a Package:  The SLL in 2020  complemented the IMF ’s existing emergency 
lending toolkit and was followed by a USD 650 billion allocation of SDRs in 2021.  
The IMF entered the pandemic with USD 1 trillion of lending capacity, some of which it 
deployed to 86 of its 190 members  either through the  emergency lending account  for 
members with strong fundamentals  (the GRA) or the on-lending program for  low-income 
members (the PRGT) (see Figure 5). Often, an IMF lending arrangement can reassure private 
and official creditors  about the soundness of a member country’s medium -term viability 
(IMF 2021f).  
  
91
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 5: Total IMF Lending Commitments 
 
Note: Dotted line indicates approximate launch date of the SLL, April 15, 2020.  
Source: IMF 2022d.  
The IMF expanded its GRA lending toolkit following the G FC with three new tools: the FCL, 
the PLL, and the Rapid Financing Instrument (RFI) (IMF 2018d; IMF 2022h).11  
The SLL , the latest GRA tool,  was a low-access precautionary liquidity line, available to 
countries facing potential, moderate, short-term balance-of-payments needs, whereas most 
of the IMF’s other facilities served immediate and significant balance-of-payments pressures 
(IMF 2022a). The SLL also complemented the FCL, a precautionary high-access12  revolving 
credit facility , by serving as an offramp for members exiting an FCL arrangement  (IMF 
2020a). Since the FCL’s  creation in March 2009, it has extended arrangements to Chile, 
Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and Poland (BCC 2022b). 
Those members whose balance-of-payments needs and policy records met the criteria of the 
FCL but who lacked the strong fundamentals required for FCL access could tap the  PLL, a 
credit line (delivered in tranches)  introduced in 2011  that offered up to 250% of the 
member’s quota annually and 500% of quota cumulatively (although actual caps depended 
on the program’s duration and the IMF’s evaluation of its success)  (IMF 2018b). Immediate 
balance-of-payments needs could be met by  purchasing foreign currency from the RFI,13 a 
low-access (37.5% of quota annually and 75% of quota cumulatively) facility without ex ante 
 
11 The facilities discussed draw from the IMF’s GRA. A slew of similar facilities w as available to low -income 
countries through the PRGT and the RST. For more information on the IMF’s funding distinction, see Key Design 
Decision No. 13, Balance Sheet Protection. 
12 Access levels refer to the amount of funds available for commitment; conditionality tends to increase with 
access level. The suite of GRA lending tools, as well as the PRGT toolkit, fall under “exceptional access” (i.e., 
above and beyond the reserves tranche), the conditions of which were defined in the 2002 Exceptional Access 
Framework as: (1) balance-of-payments pressures that cannot be met within normal financing limits; (2) a high 
probability that debt is sustainable in the medium term; (3) prospects for gaining (or regaining) private capital 
market access within a timeframe and on a scale sufficient to meet its obligations falling due to the IMF; and 
(4) a reasonably strong capacity and plan to implement adjustments (IMF 2018d) . Prior to it s access limit 
increase in 2023, the SLL is capped at 145% of a members SDR quota while the FCL had no cap, but interest 
increases as credit increases (IMF n.d.a; IMF n.d.b;). 
13 The RFI replaced the IMF’s pre -existing emergency assistance policy, which encompassed Emergency 
Natural Disaster Assistance and Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (IMF 2018d). 
92
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 14 ---
or ex post conditionality, but with an implicit requirement to cooperate with the IMF (IMF 
2018d).  
SBA, the IMF’s legacy credit tool, offers credit tranches to countries with ex post and ex ante 
commitments, normally over 12 to 18 months and up to 3 years. Countries with existing SBAs 
drew on them during the COVID-19 pandemic, but the IMF did not enter into many new SBAs 
(IMF 2018d; IMF 2020d; IMF 2022h). The Extended Fund Facility (EFF) , a fund established 
in 1974 for longer -term assistance to support members’ structural reforms and balance of 
payment needs, had 13 outstanding counterparties by April 2020; on March 25, 2020, Jordan 
became the only member to initiate a new EFF arrangement during the COVID-19 crisis (IMF 
2020d). (The PLL could also be used for immediate funding needs, despite the precautionary 
use implied by its name.)  
Chile was the only IMF member to enter an SLL arrangement. In addition to the USD 3.5 
billion committed through the SLL, the Chilean central bank had access to USD 1. 3 million 
through a regional financing arrangement —the Fondo Latinoamericano de Reservas —as 
well as access to US dollar liquidity through the Federal Reserve’s FIMA repo facility and a 
USD 8 billion renminbi swap line with the People’s Bank of China (BCC 2022b; IMF 2022b). 
The BCC never drew upon any of these liquidity arrangements. 
3. Legal Autho rity: The IMF’s Articles of Agreement authorize swap arrangements 
with IMF members and specify counterparty eligibility and conditionality.  
The SLL was authorized under the IMF’s Articles of Agreement (Articles), which allowed for 
its swap -like structure, established the conditionality and surveillance attached to the 
facility, the demonstrated need for the facility, and defined the nature of a balance-of-
payments problem.   
The Articles grant the IMF  broad power for overseeing the international monetary system 
(IMF 2010; IMF 2021a) . According to the IMF, ensuring a stable international monetary 
order requires, inter alia, monitoring the arrangements under which international reserves 
are held.14 This includes any arrangement by which IMF members access liquidity through 
the IMF or through other official currency swap arrangements (IMF 2010).15 
The IMF’s Articles require that the Fund use its resources  on a conditional basis but grants 
the IMF flexibility in designing and implementing this conditionality (IMF 2010).  
In contrast with long-standing IMF tools such as the SBA (launched in June 1952) , which 
include phased purchases and ex post monitoring, many of the IMF’s post -GFC tools—the 
 
14 The three other constitutive elements under this relatively broad objective on international monetary 
stability are: rules governing international exchange arrangements between countries and foreign exchange 
rates; rules governing payments and transfers for international transactions between countries; and rules 
governing the regulation of international capital movements (IMF 2010). 
15 The IMF is forbidden from transacting in gold unless authorized by an 85% vote (IMF 2018d).  
93
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 15 ---
SLL, FCL, and PLL, among them—require only ex ante conditionality (IMF 2009; IMF 2010).16 
In ex ante conditionality, IMF staff could determine a participant’s eligibility based on 
policies implemented in the period preceding the arrangement and use this precedence to 
infer the reliability of the participant’s future policy commitments, and occasionally check in 
to confirm policy commitments (IMF 2010). 
This conditionality is authorized by Article V, Section 3(a), which requires the IMF to adopt 
policies that will both assist members to resolve their balance-of-payments issues while also 
safeguarding the Fund’s general resources (IMF 2009; IMF 2021a) . A primary purpose of 
conditionality and the usual performance criteria included in arrangements is to meet the 
IMF’s requirement that its facilities (and its conditionality terms) assist IMF members in 
solving their problems without impairing national or international prosperity (IMF 2009).   
Recipients of an SLL arrangement agreed to enter into (or retain, if already entered into) the 
IMF’s regular Article IV surveillance process (IMF 2021a Art. VIII, Sec. 7) . The Articles 
generally recommend a repurchas e period of three to five years for IMF facilities , but the 
IMF’s executive board of directors may authorize longer or shorter adjustment periods to 
address special balance-of-payments problems. T he SLL offered a renewable 12 -month 
repurchase period (IMF n.d.b). Repurchase periods could be changed with an 85% vote  of 
the IMF’s executive board of directors (IMF 2001). 
Unique among the IMF’s facilities, the SLL arrangement could be signed independently by a 
central bank, without the co-signature of the finance ministry, provided that IMF staff could 
separately secure policy commitments from the recipient’s finance ministry (IMF 2020a).  
4. Governance: The IMF’s executive board of directors w as empowered to initiate 
and cancel SLL arrangements; drawings under an approved SLL were not subject 
to additional approval by the executive board.  
The IMF’s board of governors has the power to approve and cancel SLL arrangements, 
however, the  board of governors has functionally delegate d this p ower to the board of 
executive directors. The board of governors is composed of one representative from every 
IMF member country (normally, this representative is the central bank governor or finance 
minister); thus, it is a large body and has delegated most of its powers to the executive board, 
which conducts most of the IMF’s business under the supervision and oversight of the board 
of governors. In 2020 the executive board consisted of 24 executive directors (see Figure 6 
for a summary of the IMF’s governance structure) (IMF 2021a, Art. XII, Sec. 3; Lamdany and 
Martinez-Diaz 2009).17 The executive board’s voting powers are determined by members’ 
quotas.  
 
16 Ex ante conditionality was used in short -duration programs during the IMF’s early years, but the SBA tool , 
one of the IMF’s oldest, is known for its ex post conditionality (IMF 2009; IMF 2010). 
17 The board of governors meets once a year for a few hours (Lamdany and Martinez-Diaz 2009). 
94
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 16 ---
The International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) , which is composed of 24 
governors, meets twice a year and advises the board of governors on changes to the Articles 
or supervision of the international financial system (Lamdany and Martinez-Diaz 2009). 
Figure 6: Stylized View of IMF Governance 
 
Source: Lamdany and Martinez-Diaz 2009 .  
As with any other facility, the executive board could decide at any time to terminate the SLL 
by a simple majority of the votes cast, if, for example, the board determined the facility was 
not serving its purpose or adversely affecting the Fund’s resources (IMF 2020a).  
Article XII, Section 7(a) requires the IMF to publish quarterly financial statements, including 
from its lending facilities, as well as an annual report containing an audited statement of its 
accounts and the bylaws, rules, and regulations, which set out procedures for the conduct 
and oversight of its audit function. Following the annual audit, the report is passed by the 
external audit firm through the managing director and the executive board to the board of 
governors for approval (IMF 2018d, 155; IMF 2021a). 
5. Administration: The IMF administered the SLL following confidential negotiations 
with the member country.  
The IMF’s executive board made the final decisions on a member’s qualification and access 
to the SLL (IMF 2020a) . IMF members elect the executive board, which consists of 24 
95
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 17 ---
executive directors who represent all 190 members, 18 with the managing director acting as 
chairman (IMF 2021a, Art. XII, Sec. 3).  
The IMF  staff administered the SLL , first extending  an offer of an SLL arrangement to 
member count ries that may qualify . The country would then engage in confidential 
negotiations with the IMF to request an SLL arrangement, submitting a letter of intent that 
included a proposed policy response to meet its balance-of-payments need (IMF 2020a; IMF 
2022a). Once the IMF executive board granted its conditional approval  and offer , the 
member had two weeks to accept the offer and confirm its participation in the arrangement. 
The IMF stated that this period of consideration was designed to protect the IMF against a 
significant change in the economic conditions within the  recipient country (IMF 2020a).19 
Once the SLL arrangement ha d been accepted, the member could draw on the committed 
credit line at any time. Drawings under the SLL were not subject to additional approval by 
the IMF’s executive board because they had already received board approval.  
For any financial dealing with the IMF, a member must designate two parties: a fiscal agent 
for all financial negotiations  (normally a finance mi nistry, central bank, official monetary 
agency, stabilization fund, or similar agency) and a depository for GRA currencies and 
reserve assets (this can only be  the central bank or, if the member has no central bank , an 
IMF-approved commercial bank) . This designated depository maintains two separate 
accounts: IMF No. 1 Account, for financial transactions, and IMF No. 2 Account, for IMF-
related administrative expenses . The member guarantees all IMF assets held at the 
depository from losses (IMF 2018d). The party ultimately responsible for repaying the IMF 
was the recipient member, not an individual agency associated with the member  (IMF 
2020a). 
Most IMF arrangements include some form of conditionality. For GRA facilities, this took the 
form of commitments to enact or maintain policies to resolve the balance-of-payments crisis, 
which the member outlined in its letter of intent to engage in the SLL. The letter of intent was 
required to be signed by parties 
• Affiliated with the agency endowed with the domesti c legal authority to engage in 
fiscal and monetary policy commitments; and 
• Responsible for the subsequent implementation of these policies (see Key Design 
Decision No. 14, Other Restrictions for more details).  
Typically, a member’s ministry of finance and  central bank both would sign under this 
standard. However, cognizant that a finance ministry’s signature might be stigmatized, the 
 
18 The seven countries entitled to a sole representative (or one executive director each) are: the United States, 
China, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and Saudi Arabia. At the time Chile engaged the IMF, it was 
represented by Director Sergio Chodos, who also represented Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay, Peru, and Urugua y 
(IMF 2020f). Director Chodos’ s vote constituted 1. 6% of the total voting power of the executive board, with 
Chile’s individual voting power representing 23.6% of his vote (IMF 2024b).  
19 This timeline was slightly faster than the FCL, but generally followed the process for “exceptional access” 
facilities, which were arranged in under a month (IMF 2018a).  
96
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 18 ---
IMF permitted central banks to be the sole signatory, so long as they met these criteria and 
have the requisite legal authorities. However, in such a case the central bank would need to 
confirm that it could liaise with fiscal authorities to achieve the policy commitments. IMF 
staff would also communicate bilaterally with the finance ministry to confirm these 
commitments (IMF 2020a). Chile’s central bank and finance ministry both signed the SLL 
agreement in May 2022. 
The SLL was structured as a special revolving credit facility drawing from  the GRA (IMF 
2020a).20 The GRA is a pool of currencies and reserve assets comprised of IMF members’ 
quotas (i.e., size-indexed capital subscriptions). Facilities that draw on the GRA functionally 
extend loans, but the IMF does not consider this activity to be “lending” technically or legally; 
rather, GRA facilities involve the purchase and repurchase of currencies from the IMF , 
similar to a swap arrangement, with interest charged on outstanding purchases. Indeed, the 
IMF does not characterize itself as a lending institution, but as a repository for its members’ 
currencies and a portion of their foreign exchange reserves (IMF 2018d).  
The I MF extended financing under the SLL in a process resembling a central bank swap 
arrangement, selling its currency holdings and SDRs to borrowers in exchange for their 
domestic currency (IMF 2018d). A member could draw on an approved SLL at any time, and 
multiple times, during the facility’s 12-month period, subject to the approved access level 
(IMF 2022a) by purchasing either SDRs or the currency of another member 21 in exchange 
for an equivalent amount (in SDR terms) of its currency . At the end of the draw period, the 
member would reverse the transaction by repurchasing its currency held by the IMF by 
exchanging SDRs or another currency. Not all currencies could be used: only those members 
included on the IMF’s Financial Transaction Plan (FTP), a select list of countries with strong 
external positions, had currencies the IMF deemed “usable” and widely traded in major 
markets. Since 2016, borrowers had to finance IMF t ransactions with SDRs, the US dollar, 
euro, Japanese yen, Chinese renminbi, and British pound sterling (IMF 2018d).  
6. Communication and Disclosure: The IMF would announce SLL arrangements after 
executive board approval and upon receipt of a signed letter of  intent from the 
borrowing member.  
In addition to the initial IMF policy paper explaining the design and terms of the SLL, in April 
2020, then-Deputy Managing Director Geoffrey Okamoto published an op -ed in support of 
the SLL as a tool to address short -term liquidity shortages in emerging markets stemming 
from the COVID-19 crisis (Okamoto 2020). 
Following a participant’s written acceptance of the offer for an SLL arrangement, the IMF 
will publish a press release on the date the SLL arrangement goes into effect. In addition, the 
participant could request that the IMF issue a press release stating the IMF executive board’s 
conditional approval of the arrangement . A  member might elect to do  this if they were 
 
20 Besides the GRA, the IMF’s General Department holds resources in the Special Disbursement Account (SDA) 
and the Investment Account (IMF 2018d). 
21 In this case, the purchase could exceed the member’s quota (IMF 2018d).  
97
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 19 ---
concerned about market -sensitive leaks or misinformation regarding the offer. The IMF 
stated that such a press release would not prejudge the recipient’s decision whether to 
purchase any of the funds the IMF committed to under the SLL arrangement (IMF 2020a).  
A staff report assessing the country’s eligibility, including the borrowing authorities’ written 
communication, is published shortly thereafter. Qualification assessments for countries the 
IMF turned down for SLL access were confidential (IMF 2020a). On May 20, 2022, the IMF 
published both a press release announcing Chile’s SLL arrangement and an interview with 
BCC Governor Rosanna Costa detailing Chile’s fundamentals and eligibility for the SLL (IMF 
2022a; IMF 2022b).  
The IMF also published the IMF directors’ deliberations about the SLS, the predecessor to 
the SLL that ultimately failed to gain approval in 2017. T hese deliberations resulted from a 
long-running discussion about the adequacy of the “global financial safety net ,” a report the 
IMF published in 2016. The IMF characterized the SLL as a tool designed to enhance the 
global financial safety net, which it defined as the world’s aggregate stock of available funds 
from FX reserves, bilateral swap arrangements, regional financing arrangements, the IMF, 
and market-based instruments (IMF 2016; IMF 2020a).  
Chile issued press releases upon its exit from the FCL and enrollment in the SLL and, three 
months later, its subsequent return to the FCL, as well as an FAQ document explaining its 
decisions (BCC 2022a; BCC 2022b; BCC 2022c).  Chile exited the SLL in 2022 and transitioned 
to the FCL, citing the FCL’s higher access limits and broader coverage of balance-of-payments 
risks as better suited to address the significant external vulnerabilities it faced, particularly 
in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic (IMF 2023b).  
7. Eligible Institutions : As with other  IMF facilities, SLL eligibility was based on a 
member’s policy history and commitments.  
The IMF intended the SLL for emerging market economies experiencing balance-of-
payments pressures and demonstrating a strong record of effective policy responses to those 
pressures in the past (IMF 2020a). Eligibility for any of the IMF’s GRA operations is  limited 
to members the IMF considers to be in a strong balance-of-payments and reserves position 
(IMF 2018d).22  
Qualification criteria for the SLL resembled that of other IMF facilities and was identical to 
the FCL, which facilitated members’ transition between these two facilities (IMF 2022a). To 
qualify for either facility , a member had to demonstrate “very strong policies” capable of 
addressing potential short -term, moderate capital account pressures arising from external 
developments (IMF 2020a) . To determine eligibility for  the SLL, FCL, and PLL , the IMF 
evaluated members’ policies based on nine criteria (see Figure 7).   
 
22 The IMF maintains a list of such members, the FTP, which is reviewed on a quarterly basis (IMF 2018d). 
98
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 7: Qualification Criteria for the Short-Term Liquidity Line 
 CRITERION INDICATOR 
Eternal 
position and 
market access 
(1) A sustainable external position  
Gross and net (short -term) external debt/GDP , and share of 
bank, nonbank and public sector ; including debt sustainability 
analysis (DSA) assessment; debt-stabilizing noninterest current 
account deficit  
(2) A capital account position 
dominated by private flows  
Foreign direct investment ( FDI) plus portfolio inflows as % of 
total capital inflows; ratio of private holdings of external 
debt/gross external debt; and private foreign holdings of 
domestic debt/total domestic debt  
(3) A track record of steady sovereign 
access to capital markets at favorable 
terms.  
Emerging Market Bond index ( EMBI) spread; spread between 
country EMBI and EMBI overall index (latest observation and 
averages over previous five years); current yield on benchmark 
bonds; credit ratings; and last external issuance (details on 
amount issued/original yield/maturity)  
(4) Comfortable current reserve 
position, notwithstanding potential 
balance-of-payments pressure  
Ratio of reserves to: ARA metric, short -term debt (remaining 
maturity basis); short- term debt (remaining maturity basis) plus 
current account deficit; imports; and broad money 
Fiscal policy (5) Sound public finances, including a 
sustainable public debt position  
Public sector debt/GDP, and debt sustainability assessment; 
primary and overall fiscal balance (average for the last 3 –5 
years); structural fiscal balances and debt -stabilizing primary 
balance. Assessment of medium term p lans anchoring fiscal 
policy outcomes; and overall sound institutional budgetary 
framework as informed by recent fiscal Reports on the 
Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs), where available 
Monetary 
policy 
(6) Low and stable inflation in the 
context of a sound monetary and 
exchange rate policy framework 
Recent evolution of core and headline inflation and inflation 
expectations. Past and announced policy responses to 
inflationary shocks. Adequacy of monetary policy instruments to 
conduct monetary policy. Accountability, transparency, and 
communication regarding policy objectives/responses 
Financial 
sector 
soundness and 
supervision  
(7) Sound financial system and the 
absence of solvency problems that may 
threaten systemic stability  
Capital adequacy and profitability: capital adequacy ratio (CAR) 
(overall banking system and individual banks) ; and return on 
equity (overall banking system and individual banks). Liquidity 
and funding risks: liquid assets to total liabilities; liquid assets to 
short-term liabilities; loan-to-deposit ratio; and share of external 
funding in total liabilities. Asset  quality: credit to the private 
sector (real growth rate and share of GDP); and nonperforming 
loan ratios (overall banking system and individual banks) 
(8) Effective financial sector supervision  
Assessment of supervisory standards and practices based on 
Financial Sector Assessment Program ( FSAP) findings. 
Assessment of legal and institutional framework and 
operational capacity for prompt corrective actions and 
emergency liquidity assistance 
Data adequacy (9) Data transparency and integrity  
Subscription to the Special Data Dissemination System (SDDS) or 
a judgment that satisfactory progress is being made toward 
meeting its requirements. Routine assessments (Article IV 
consultations) of data quality and integrity, informed by data 
ROSCs, where available 
Source: Recreated from IMF 2018a. 
The IMF did not require members to meet all nine criteria to qualify for one of these facilities, 
but it also did not define a qualifying threshold. IMF staff may have also considered fiscal and 
monetary policy cyclicality ( in other words, the correlation between gove rnment spending 
or short-term policy rates and cyclically  adjusted GDP) and a history of effective responses 
99
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 21 ---
to policy shocks, as indicated by third-party measurements of government effectiveness and 
control of corruption. Because a track record of such po licies was a prerequisite  for access, 
the IMF evaluated a member on the above criteria over the preceding five years (IMF 2018a). 
The SLL was based in part on a 2017 proposal for a swap-like revolving credit line called 
Short-Term Liquidity Swap. The SLS, along with the FCL and PLL, were born of an IMF study 
into global funding conditions among “systemic” and “gatekeeper” economies (IMF 2016; 
IMF 2020a).23 The IMF defines systemic economies as those with significant contributions to 
global markets via finance or trade . Gatekeeper economies are those with a propensity to 
transmit trade or financial shocks to other countries and precipitate  crisis spillovers.24 The 
IMF determined that both types of economies may exhibit 
• Inadequate predictability and reliability around central bank swap arrangements and 
regional financing arrangements; and 
• High financial costs (or reserve accumulation) or political costs (or stigma associated 
with IMF financing) (IMF 2016).  
Chile did not appear in the IMF’s classification of systemic and gatekeeper economies. 25 
Nevertheless, the  IMF offered the SLL  to Chile based on its strong policy response to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, noting the country’s improved liquidity condition from international 
reserves purchases, macroeconomic stability, fiscal sustainability, and strong policy 
reputation (IMF 2022a). Chile had already qualified for the FCL, which it initially entered into 
on May 29, 2020, and to which it returned on August 29, 2022, two months aft er entering 
into the SLL arrangement (BCC 2022b; IMF 2020c). 
For the purposes of determining the scope of the SLL’s impact on the Fund’s resources, the 
IMF considered all countries with strong policy records, excepting reserve currency issuers 
(or eurozone countries with access to reserve currency-issuing central banks) and countries 
with standing swap agreements with the Federal Reserve  as potential SLL borrowers  (IMF 
2020a). (Chile’s access to the Federal Reserve’s FIMA facility was not considered a “standing” 
arrangement since it carried an expiration date at the time. The Fed has since converted it to 
a standing facility.)  
Governance of the Borrower 
The IMF has attached conditionality to its lending since its inception, a legacy adopted from 
the other international nonstate lending organizations that preceded it (Martin 2022). For 
the Fund’s GRA facilities, this conditionality takes two forms: ex ante (before an arrangement 
was approved), usually in the form of an evaluation of the member’s policy track record, and 
ex post  (after a member activated the facility), which normally involved monitoring and 
 
23 The IMF stud ied the “global financial safety net,” comprising international reserves, central bank bilateral 
swap arrangements, regional financing arrangements, IMF resources, and market -based instruments (IMF 
2016).  
24 As of 2016, gatekeeper emerging market countries included: Brazil, China, Panama, South Africa, and Turkey 
(IMF 2016). 
25 Chile joined the IMF on December 31, 1945 (IMF 2023a).  
100
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 22 ---
surveillance of the policy response  for example thr ough the Article IV review process. The 
SLL was only available to members with strong fundamentals—in other words, the member 
state had passed an ex ante evaluation—so were not subject to ex post conditionality.26 The 
member had the primary responsibility for designing and implementing this policy 
response, which it was required to detail in its SLL letter of intent before access to the facility 
was approved (IMF 2018d, 32).  
8. Size: Participants could draw up to 145% of their IMF quota  under a n SLL 
arrangement.  
Once the SLL  arrangement took effect , the recipient country could draw up to 145%  
(upgraded to 200% in 2023) of their IMF quota during the 12-month SLL arrangement (IMF 
2020a). The IMF assigns each member a maximum financial commitment, or quota, based 
on the member’s relative position in the world economy. The member pays a capital 
subscription to the IMF equal to this quota —25% in SDR, or currencies of other strong IMF 
members, and 75% in the member’s own currency. Quotas are the primary source of the 
IMF’s financial base, enabling the IMF to engage in GRA lending. They also determine the 
distribution of voting power among IMF members, a country’s representation on the IMF 
executive board, its access to IMF resources, and its share in SDR allocation, with the IMF 
typically reviewing quotas every five years (IMF 2023c; Ramlogan and Fritz-Krockow 2007). 
This limit applies to all members borrowing under GRA programs , and any member’s total 
GRA borrowing cannot exceed 435% of quota cumulatively, net of scheduled repurchase 
obligations. Access to the GRA above these limits is subject to the IMF’s exceptional access 
policy—a framework that permits countries facing exceptional balance-of-payments needs 
to borrow beyond standard limits if they meet certain criteria for debt sustainability, 
economic reform, and prospects for market access (IMF 2024a). 
Chile accepted the offer for the SLL in May 2022 for the full 145% of its quota, amounting to 
USD 3.5 billion (IMF 2022a). Chile did not draw any amounts under the SLL arrangement 
before terminating it.  
In 2020, Chile’s quota, paid in Chilean pesos, was equivalent to SDR 1.7 billion, of which the 
IMF held SDR 1.3 billion (or 74.8%) in Chilean pesos (IMF n.d.d; IMF 2021c).  
9. Process for Utilizing the Funds or Allocation : IMF members confidentially 
requested SLL access , which was subject to board approval. Once approved,  the 
member could purchase committed funds without further board approval. 
Potential participants confidentially consulted with the IMF, which assessed the participant’s 
qualification, the appropriate level of SLL access, and whether another IMF facility would be 
more appropriate; if the candidate qualified ; the IMF summarized these deliberations in a 
staff report . On the basis of the report’s contents, the IMF executive board approved the 
extension of the offer, contingent upon the participant’s written ac ceptance of the offer 
 
26 However, SLL participants were retained or placed on the annual cycle of Article IV consultations (IMF 
2020a). 
101
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 23 ---
within two weeks of notification . This offer required the participant’s response (a letter of 
intent) to commit to maintaining “very strong economic policies” and to respond to shocks 
that arise. The arrangement took effect once the IMF confirmed receipt of the signed written 
acceptance of the conditional offer. The IMF published a press release announcing the details 
of the SLL arrangement and the staff report (IMF 2020a).  
A member could purchase funds under an SLL arrangement without further approval by the 
IMF staff (except for administrative processing approvals) but the executive board would be 
informed of all such purchases . The executive board and staff  would not challenge an SLL 
participant’s characterization of their need for SLL funds, but the IMF expected the member’s 
drawings would be commensurate with its actual balance-of-payments need at the time of 
the member’s purchase (see the Key Design Decision No. 3, Legal Authority, for details) (IMF 
2020a).  
The process for participating in an SLL arrangement mostly resembled the process for 
accessing the FCL, except the informal IMF board meetings required for FCL arrangements 
were not required for SLL arrangements (IMF 2020a).  
10. Downstream Use of Borrowed Funds:  The IMF preauthorized its precautionary 
facilities, which participants could use only to meet actual balance-of-payments 
needs; this took the form of monetary intervention because the IMF forbid s 
borrowers from using SLL funds for fiscal measures.  
The IMF offers several “precautionary” facilities, including the SLL, FCL, and PLL. Although 
members may enter any of these three arrangements by communicating the potential for a 
balance-of-payments need, Article V, Section 3(b) states that a member can o nly make a 
purchase from the committed funds if the country represents that it is experiencing an actual 
balance-of-payments need, and only up to the amount it represents as necessary to meet that 
need. The IMF could not challenge this “need” ex ante, but if the arrangement was drawn 
upon and the Fund found in an ex post evaluation that the conditions were not met, it could 
take “remedial action.”27 The IMF intends such a need to mean one affecting the balance-of-
payments position of the member, its foreign  reserve position, and developments in those 
reserves, though the IMF’s determination of “need” could be met by any one of these 
conditions (IMF 2018d; IMF 2021a, Art. V, Sec. 3[b]).  
In assigning the country’s central bank as the sole depository for SLL funds, the IMF expected 
that funds drawn from the facility would be used as international reserves —that is, in 
support of fiscal policies, but not directly used for fiscal measures (BCC 2022c). Chile remains 
the only country to sign an SLL agreement, but never drew upon the line (IMF 2023b).  
11. Duration: The SLL’s repurchase period is set at 12 months to provide short -term 
balance-of-payments needs.  
Both the SLL and FCL are designed for countries with strong policy frameworks and 
fundamentals but serve diff erent purposes, reflected in their repurchase periods. The SLL, 
 
27 This conditionality is also true of reserve tranche purchases (IMF 2018d).  
102
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 24 ---
intended to address moderate, short-term balance-of-payments needs, requires repurchases 
within 12 months (IMF n.d.b). In contrast, the FCL, which provides a safety net for sustained 
financing needs, allows for a longer repurchase period of three to five years, accommodating 
medium-term external vulnerabilities (IMF n.d.a). 
12. Rates and Fees: The IMF charged various origination fees  for SLL arrangements , 
and outstanding SLL purchases would be charged the SDR interest rate. 
The IMF charged a nonrefundable commitment fee at the beginning of the arrangement (8 
bps), a service charge (21 bps), a “normal rate of charge” (SDR rate + a fixed margin of 100 
bps), and a “normal schedule” for level-based surcharges (in other words, surcharges based 
on access and duration; see Figure 4 for examples and Figure 8 for a time series of the SDR 
interest rate). Funds accessed through the SLL did not count towards time-based surcharges 
(IMF 2020a).  
Figure 8: SDR Interest Rate 
 
Note: Dotted line indicates approximate launch date of the SLL.  
Source: IMF 2022d.  
The IMF noted that single use of the SLL would be a cost-effective solution to liquidity strains 
relative to drawing down or purchasing more reserves, and countries seeking IMF assistance 
would likely benefit from lower yields on public debt. However, given the nature of the SLL 
and the types of crises it was designed to relieve, the IMF anticipated that countries 
participating in a 12-month SLL arrangement would seek a second arrangement (IMF n.d.b). 
The SLL was predicted to be cheaper than the FCL if used once and on a precautionary basis. 
However, although the SLL had terms and qualifications similar to the FCL, the FCL had no 
access limit and could be tapped for any balance-of-payments need. By comparison to the 
SLL, the FCL  charged more onerous fees: a normal schedule for commitment fees that are 
refundable on drawings (15 bps, up to 115% of quota ; 30 bps from 115% to 575 %; and 60 
bps for more than 575%), a normal service charge (50 bps), and a normal rate of charge and 
surcharge schedule (IMF n.d.b; IMF 2020a).  
13. Balance Sheet Protection : The IMF transacts in SDRs at the SDR interest rate, 
which limits  its exchange rate and interest rate risk, but its countercyclical 
103
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 25 ---
lending activity exposes it to exceptionally high credit risk, which it manages with 
access limits and program monitoring.  
IMF members maintained a reserve tranche position in the IMF —the “facility of first 
resort"—and SLL purchases did not affect this balance; rather, a member’s p urchases 
through the SLL  “floated” against that member’s  reserve tranche  (IMF 2018d, 42; IMF 
2020a).28 Approval of a n SLL arrangement did not mean the recipient had to draw on the 
swap line, and Chile did not draw on its arrangement. A recipient central bank would only be 
required to record a liability against the IMF once it drew under the SLL arrangement (BCC 
2022c). This liability would be denominated in SDR (IMF 2018d).  
Likewise, IMF borrowing has generally been denominated in SDRs (or the currencies that 
make up the SDR basket in proportion to their weight in that basket) to avoid exchange risks 
(IMF 2018d). The swap-like approach to the IMF’s lending activity may alter the composition 
of the IMF’s resources but does not affect  its overall size. An increase in loans outstanding 
reduces the IMF’s holdings of usable currencies and increases the IMF’s holdings of the 
currencies of the borrowing members.  
At the time the SLL was announced, the IMF’s one -year forward commitment capacity (or 
FCC, the amount of resources available for new lending through the GRA over the next 12 
months) stood at USD 265 billion (of a total USD 471 billion of total resources available to 
the IMF a cross all accounts) (IMF 2018d; IMF 2020d) . This consisted entirely  of quota 
resources from most members; the Fund did not have to supplement these resources with 
borrowing (IMF 2020a).29 
The SLL exposed the IMF to risks similar to the FCL and PLL . Unlike other IMF 
nonconcessional lending arrangements that define access on a flow basis  (e.g., credit 
tranches through an SBA), access to the SLL was defined as a limit on the stock of IMF credit 
committed (or outstanding), up to a maximum of 145% of the country’s quota (IMF 2020a).  
The IMF’s risk management framework centers on the credit risk of its lending activity. As 
global lender of last resort, the IMF’s lending is countercyclical —it often lends into a crisis 
as market-based funding sources pull b ack. Thus, the Fund is exposed not only to the risk 
that its borrowers will not make the repurchases they have committed to , but also risks 
owing to the concentration and correlation of its lending activity.30 To mitigate these credit 
 
28 The IMF directed members to their reserve tranches first because these reserves were convertible into SDRs 
(or other freely usable currencies) on demand and were considered part of the country’s own foreign exchange 
reserves. 
29 Quota resources were contributed by members included on the IMF’s FTP, a select list of count ries with 
strong external positions, which had currencies the IMF deemed “usable” (IMF 2018d) . The IMF borrows 
through New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) or bilateral borrowings. Although it had uncommitted resources 
under the NAB —for example, Chile had comm itted USD 31.1 million to the NAB in the fiscal year ending 
December 31, 2020—it did not use them (BCC 2020).  
30 The IMF is limited in its ability to use its Investment Account to diversify away the credit risk inherent in the 
activity of GRA and PRGT acco unts, which are held separately in the General Department (IMF 2018d; IMF 
2021a Art. XII, Sec. 6(f)) . The Investment Account is comprised of two accounts whose purposes are to (1) 
104
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 26 ---
risks, the IMF places  limits on facility access—level of access, as well as duration and 
frequency—and imposes conditionality, including pre -program evaluation of 
macroeconomic fundamentals ( ex ante  conditionality) and post -program monitoring and 
surveillance (ex post conditionality) (IMF 2018d).31  
The IMF is not exposed to significant interest rate risk because the same floating interest rate 
charged to borrowers at the IMF is equal to the rate of remuneration paid by the IMF to its 
creditors. This rate is directly linked to the SDR interest rate. The IMF also does not face 
exchange rate risks on its GRA lending. Pursuant to its Articles of Agreement, IMF members 
hold the borrowed funds in SDRs, and any variance in the member’s currency against the 
SDR must be settle d at the end of the financial year (or upon request by the IMF or the 
member) (IMF 2018d; IMF 2021a, Art. XX). 
The IMF enjoys preferred creditor status owing to its role as global lender of last resort and 
its inability to legally restructure the claims of its members. The practical implication of this 
status is that creditors exclude the IMF from any sovereign debt restructurings and 
voluntarily exercise forbearance, while unsecured creditors do not subordinate their claims 
to those of the IMF (IMF 2018d).  
The SLL drew on the IMF’s GRA, which is funded by members’ quotas and supplemented on 
a temporary basis with New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB)—a set of credit arrangements 
among member countries designed to provide additional funds to the IMF —when needed 
(IMF 2018d; IMF 2020a) .32 GRA currencies and reserve assets are held at members’ 
depositories (IMF 2018d). Only the BCC could transfer resources through the FCL and SLL , 
and it was responsible for managing them as part of its international reserves ; the IM F 
forbade borrowers from using the committed funds for direct fiscal spending (BCC 2022c).  
14. Other Restrictions: The IMF required SLL participants to commit to “very strong 
economic policies” and respond to shocks as they arose.  
Members were restricted fro m engaging multiple IMF facilities at once. Requesting an SLL 
arrangement would require cancelling any existing FCL arrangement, and vice versa (IMF 
2020a). Likewise, a country whose external position was strong enough to qualify it for the 
SLL was likely also eligible to be included in the FTP—a framework that governs a country’s 
financial transactions with the IMF, including borrowing and repurchasing. 
 
generate returns in excess of the SDR interest rate and (2) generate a long-term real return of 3% (IMF 2018d, 
170). 
31 The IMF executive board gives additional scrutiny to those members whose proposed access exceeds 145% 
of their quota annually or 435% cumulatively (net of scheduled repurchases)—in other words, for the PLL and 
FCL. The IMF also maintains a prudential balance of 20% of the quotas of members who are engaged in IMF  
arrangements (IMF 2018d).  
32 NAB had regularly exceeded 100% of quota resources between 2011 and 2016, when quotas were 
recalculated to appropriately fund the FCC without NAB. For example, see (IMF 2021d). 
105
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 27 ---
15. Other Options: The SLL was the IMF’s only liquidity tool designed specifically to 
address short-term balance-of-payments pressures on emerging market 
countries with strong external positions.  
The SLL was designed to fill a gap in the IMF’s lending toolkit: The SLL was available for those 
members whose economies were strong enough to qualify them for the FCL , but who only 
needed the amount of credit offered  by the PLL  (which served countries with weaker 
economic fundamentals ). Chile switched from the SLL to the FCL (with its larger credit 
allotments and longer maturity) in response to persistent inflationary pressures in 2022 
(IMF 2022c).  
When the SLL’s predecessor, the SLS, was proposed in 2017, some IMF directors considered 
making it higher access to better serve member s with large liquidity needs. During these 
deliberations, IMF directors contemplated eliminating the PLL given its low use; between 
2020 and 2022, Panama was the only member to engage in a PLL arrangement (100% of 
quota) but never drew upon it (IMF 2017b; IMF 2020d; IMF 2021d).  
On August 23, 2021, the IMF also allocated USD 650 billion worth of SDRs, the largest 
allotment in the Fund’s history  by a treble factor (IMF 2021b) .33 In addition to 
supplementing foreign reserves and paying IMF debts, SDRs can be exchanged for IMF 
member nations’ freely usable currencies. Thus, the SDR serves as an indirect means of 
obtaining any SDR basket currency from an IMF member nation. There are currently five 
SDR basket currencies , all global reserve currencies —the US dolla r, euro, Japanese yen, 
Chinese renminbi, and British pound sterling (IMF 2022e). 
16. Exit Strategy: The SLL was established for an initial seven -year period, with IMF 
reviewing the SLL in 2023 and a planned second review in 2025. 
The SLL was established for a seven -year period, with a formal review planned for 2025, at 
which point the executive board of the IMF would determine whether a renewal was 
necessary (IMF 2020a). As of November 2024, the SLL is still in operation.  
A 2023 IMF review of its precautionary toolkit found that the SLL is an effective tool for quick 
credit access but its limited use stemmed from factors like a low access limit (145% of quota) 
and some qualifying countries may not have been fully aware of its benef its. To improve its 
effectiveness, the IMF proposed raising the SLL’s access limit to 200% of quota and allowing 
concurrent use with the FCL, enabling countries to address both moderate and tail risks . 
These changes aim to enhance the SLL’s flexibility and  effectiveness while increasing 
combined access to up to 400% of quota (IMF 2023b). 
  
 
33 For more information on the 2021 SDR allocation, see Arnold (2024).  
106
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 28 ---
References and Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
(IMF 2020a) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020a. “IMF COVID-19 Response—A New 
Short-Term Liquidity Line to Enhance the Adequacy of the Global Financial Safety Net,” 
April 21, 2020. 
IMF policy paper summarizing the design details and circumstances around the SLL. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/736 
(IMF n.d.a) International Monetary Fund (IMF). n.d.a. “The Flexible Credit Line (FCL).” 
Summary of the FCL and its design features. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5136 
(IMF n.d.b) International Monetary Fund (IMF). n.d.b. “The Short-term Liquidity Line 
(SLL).” 
Summary of the SLL and its design features. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5148 
(IMF n.d.c) International Monetary Fund (IMF). n.d.c. “The Short-term Liquidity Line (SLL).” 
Updated summary of the SLL and its design features. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/675 
Implementation Documents 
(BCC 2022a) Banco Central de Chile (BCC). 2022a. “Acuerdo adoptado por el consejo del 
Banco Central de Chile en su sesión ordinaria no 2473e,” May 20, 2022. 
The SLL agreement between the IMF and the Banco Central de Chile (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/738 
(IMF 2018a) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018a. “Flexible Credit Line — 
Operational Guidance Note,” July 11, 2018. 
The IMF’s operational guidance note on the FCL. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/753 
(IMF 2018b) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018b. “Precautionary and Liquidity Line 
— Operational Guidance Note,” July 11, 2018. 
The IMF’s operational guidance note on the PLL. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/752 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(IMF 2009) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2009. “Conditionality in Fund-Supported 
Programs-Purposes, Modalities, and Options for Reform,” January 29, 2009. 
An evaluation of the IMF’s policies surrounding lending conditionality. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/764 
107
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 29 ---
(IMF 2010) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2010. “The Fund’s Mandate—The Legal 
Framework,” February 22, 2010. 
Overview of the IMF’s legal framework. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/766 
(IMF 2021a) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021a. “Articles of Agreement of the 
International Monetary Fund,” December 15, 2021. 
The IMF’s Articles of Agreement. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/655 
Media Stories 
(Okamoto 2020) Okamoto, Geoffrey W.S. 2020. “The Short-Term Liquidity Line: A New IMF 
Tool to Help in the Crisis,” April 22, 2020. 
Blog post from the deputy managing director of the IMF detailing the purpose of the SLL. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5140 
(Reuters 2020) Reuters. 2020. “Chilean Central Bank Strikes Deal with China to Expand 
Currency Swap to $7.1 Bln,” July 24, 2020. 
Reuters article describing the BCC-PBOC swap line increase in 2020. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/771 
(Shalal 2020) Shalal, Andrea. 2020. “Update 1-IMF Sees $50 Billion in Current Demand for 
New Short-Term Liquidity Line.” Reuters News, April 22, 2020. 
Reuters News article on the IMF’s projected demand for the SLL. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5142 
(CE Noticias Financieras 2022) CE Noticias Financieras. 2022. “IMF Announces US$ 18.5 
Billion Loan Agreement with Chile,” September 12, 2022. 
News agency article on Chile’s new FCL agreement following the termination of the SLL. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5143 
Press Releases/Announcements 
(BCC 2020) Banco Central de Chile (BCC). 2020. “Estados Financieros,” December 31, 2020. 
The Chilean central bank’s financial statements for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2020 
(in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/739 
  
108
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 30 ---
(BCC 2022b) Banco Central de Chile (BCC). 2022b. “Banco Central de Chile suscribe línea de 
crédito flexible con el Fondo Monetario Internacional por US$18.500 millones.” Press 
release, August 29, 2022. 
Press release from the Chilean central bank upon re-entering into the IMF’s FCL in 2022 (in 
Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/740 
(BCC 2022c) Banco Central de Chile (BCC). 2022c. “Documento Preguntas y Respuestas 
Línea de Crédito Flexible del FMI – Agosto 2022,” August 29, 2022. 
Q&A document issued by the Chilean central bank in response to the August 2022 
announcement to initiate a new IMF FCL arrangement (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/741 
(BIS 2022) Bank for International Settlements (BIS). 2022. “BIS Announces Renminbi 
Liquidity Arrangement.” Press release, June 25, 2022. 
BIS announcement of the Renminbi Liquidity Arrangement (RMBLA), developed with the 
People’s Bank of China to provide liquidity to Indonesia, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Chile. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/742 
(IMF 2017a) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2017a. “IMF Executive Board Discusses 
Proposals for Toolkit Reform, Concludes Review of the Flexible Credit Line and 
Precautionary and Liquidity Line.” Press release, December 19, 2017. 
IMF summary of executive board discussions on the SLS proposal. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/661 
(IMF 2018c) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018c. “IMF Executive Board Approves 
US$50 Billion Stand-by Arrangement for Argentina.” Press release, June 20, 2018. 
IMF announcement of the 2018 Stand-By Arrangement for Argentina. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5139 
(IMF 2020b) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020b. “Chile: Request for an 
Arrangement Under the Flexible Credit Line.” IMF Country Report No. 20/183, May 2020. 
IMF announcement of Chile’s original FCL arrangement. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/769 
(IMF 2020c) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020c. “IMF Executive Board Approves 
Two-Year US$23.93 Billion Flexible Credit Line Arrangement for Chile.” Press release, May 
29, 2020. 
IMF announcement of Chile’s May 2020 FCL arrangement. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/744 
(IMF 2021b) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021b. “IMF Governors Approve a 
Historic US$650 Billion SDR Allocation of Special Drawing Rights.” Press release, August 2, 
2021. 
IMF press release announcing 2021 SDR allocation. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/663 
109
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 31 ---
(IMF 2022a) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022a. “Chile Receives IMF’s First Short-
Term Liquidity Line.” Press release, May 20, 2022. 
Announcement of Chile’s participation in the SLL. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/745 
(IMF 2022b) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022b. “Chile’s New Short-Term Liquidity 
Line to Support Resilience and Recovery,” May 20, 2022. 
IMF interview with Rosanna Costa, governor of the Central Bank of Chile, and Ana Corbacho, 
IMF mission chief, on the day of the IMF’s announcement of Chile’s SLL arrangement. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/746 
(IMF 2022c) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022c. “Chile: Request for an 
Arrangement Under the Flexible Credit Line and Cancellation of the Arrangement Under 
the Short-Term Liquidity Line.” IMF Country Report No 22/283, August 2022. 
IMF announcement of Chile’s request to cancel the SLL arrangement and resume the FCL 
arrangement in light of deteriorating economic conditions. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/747 
Reports/Assessments 
(IMF 2001) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2001. “General Department.” In Financial 
Organization and Operations of the IMF, 6th ed. Pamphlet Series 45. 
A description of the three separate accounts that hold IMF resources: the General Resources 
Account, the Special Disbursement Account, and the Investment Account. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/748 
(IMF 2016) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016. “Adequacy of the Global Financial 
Safety Net,” March 2016. 
An IMF report measuring the adequacy of global central bank reserves, IMF reserves, bilateral 
swap networks, regional financing arrangements, and market-based instruments. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/750 
(IMF 2017b) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2017b. “The Acting Chair’s Summing Up - 
Adequacy of the Global Financial Safety Net.” Executive Board Meeting 17/56, June 30, 
2017. 
A review of the Flexible Credit Line and Precautionary and Liquidity Line, and proposals for 
toolkit reform. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/751 
(IMF 2019) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2019. “Weekly Report on Key Financial 
Statistics,” April 25, 2019. 
IMF’s forward commitment capacity for the week of April 25, 2019. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/754 
  
110
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 32 ---
(IMF 2020d) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020d. “Weekly Report on Key Financial 
Statistics,” April 17, 2020. 
IMF’s forward commitment capacity for the week of April 17, 2020. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/755 
(IMF 2020e) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020e. “Transcript of the Background 
Briefing on the Short-Term Liquidity Line,” May 8, 2020. 
Transcript of a  panel discussion moderated by Maria Candia, from the IMF communications 
team, between two IMF officials discussing the new SLL. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5145 
(IMF 2020f) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2020f. Annual Report 2020. 
The IMF’s 2020 annual report. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/756 
(IMF 2021c) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021c. “Chile: 2021 Article IV 
Consultation.” IMF Country Report No 21/83, April 2021. 
IMF Article IV Consultation report for 2021. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/758 
(IMF 2021d) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021d. “Weekly Report on Key Financial 
Statistics,” April 30, 2021. 
IMF’s forward commitment capacity for the week of April 30, 2021. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/759 
(IMF 2021e) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021e. “Questions and Answers on 
Special Drawing Rights,” August 23, 2021. 
Q&A covering questions about an SDR allocation. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/667/ 
(IMF 2022d) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022d. “Weekly Report on Key Financial 
Statistics,” April 29, 2022. 
IMF’s forward commitment capacity for the week of April 29, 2022. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/760 
(IMF 2022f) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022f. “Chile: History of Lending 
Commitments,” November 30, 2022. 
Data on Chile’s IMF arrangements since 1956. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/762 
(IMF 2023a) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2023a. “Financial Position in the Fund for 
Chile,” January 31, 2023. 
Summary of Chile’s financial position at the IMF in 2022. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/824 
  
111
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 33 ---
(IMF 2023b) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2023b. “Review of the Flexible Credit 
Line, the Short-Term Liquidity Line and the Precautionary and Liquidity Line, and 
Proposals for Reform.” IMF Policy Paper, October 2023. 
IMF review of the FCL, SLL, and PLL. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5137 
(IMF 2024a) International Monetary Fund (IMF) (IMF). 2024a. “Extension of Temporary 
Increase in Normal Access Limits Under the General Resources Account.” IMF Policy Paper, 
March 2024. 
Policy paper mapping out the IMF executive board’s extension of a temporary increase in 
access limits under the general resources account. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5146 
(IMF n.d.d) International Monetary Fund (IMF). n.d.d. “Chile.” Accessed December 10, 2022. 
IMF webpage with a summary of Chile’s position at the IMF in 2020. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/763 
Key Academic Papers  
(Arnold 2024) Arnold, Vincient. 2024. “International Monetary Fund: Foreign Exchange 
Liquidity through the Special Drawing Rights Allocation, 2021.” Journal of Financial Crises 
6, no. 4. 
YPFS case study discussing the IMF’s COVID-19 SDR allocation. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss4/2/ 
(IMF 2018d) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018d. IMF Financial Operations 2018. 
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund. 
Book describing the IMF’s SDR Department and uses of SDRs among IMF members. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/662 
(Kelly 2023) Kelly, Steven. 2023. “United States: FIMA Repo Facility, 2020.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 5, no. 1. 
YPFS case study discussing the US Federal Reserve’s Foreign and International Monetary 
Authorities liquidity facility. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss1/23 
(Lamdany and Martinez-Diaz 2009) Lamdany, Ruben, and Leonardo Martinez-Diaz. 2009. 
“Evaluating the Governance of the IMF.” Studies of IMF Governance: A Compendium. 
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund. 
A compendium of studies on the governance of the IMF. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/774 
(Martin 2022) Martin, Jamie. 2022. The Meddlers: Sovereignty, Empire, and the Birth of 
Global Economic Governance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
The Meddlers examines how sovereignty and empire shaped the origins of global economic 
governance. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/773 
112
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 34 ---
(Perks et al. 2021) Perks, Michael, Yudong Rao, Jongsoon Shin, and Kiichi Tokuoka.  2021. 
“Evolution of Bilateral Swap Lines.” IMF Working Paper WP/21/210, August 2021. 
Study documenting existence of and roles of international swap lines. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14801 
Other 
(IMF 2021f) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2021f. “The IMF’s Response to COVID-19,” 
April 8, 2021. 
Webpage with FAQs on the IMF’s COVID-19 response. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/757 
(IMF 2022e) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022e. “Special Drawing Rights (SDR),” 
July 29, 2022. 
Factsheet explaining the history and function of SDRs. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/657 
(IMF 2022g) International Monetary Fund (IMF) (IMF). 2022g. “Chile: IMF SDR Allocations 
and Holdings,” November 30, 2022. 
Table listing the SDR holdings of Chile as of November 30, 2022. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/761 
(IMF 2022h) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022h. “IMF Lending,” December 2022. 
Webpage summarizing the IMF’s lending toolkit and each tool’s purpose. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/825 
(IMF 2023c) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2023c. “IMF Quotas,” December 2023. 
Fact sheet explaining IMF quotas. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5141 
(IMF 2024b) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2024b. “IMF Executive Directors and 
Voting Power,” November 18, 2024. 
List of IMF members, quotas, governors, and voting power, as of 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4856 
(Ramlogan and Fritz-Krockow 2007) Ramlogan, Parmeshwar, and Bernhard Fritz-
Krockow. 2007. “Overview of the IMF.” In International Monetary Fund Handbook. 
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund. 
Book chapter outlining the IMF mandate, functions, strategy, origins, and membership. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5134 
 
  
113
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 35 ---
Appendix 
Figure 9: Detailed Comparison of the Key Features of the SLL and FCL 
 
Source: IMF 2020a. 
  
114
International Monetary Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020 Mott and Brougher

--- Page 36 ---
Copyright 2024 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
115
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4