--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 1 
2024 
Lessons Learned: Til Schuermann Lessons Learned: Til Schuermann 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2024) "Lessons Learned: Til Schuermann," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 1, 
619-621. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1553 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss1/25 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss1/25

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Til Schuermann 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Til Schuermann joined the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) in 2001 and held several 
positions during his tenure , including senior vice president and head of Financial 
Intermediation in Research and head of Credit Risk in Bank Supervision . In spring 2009, he 
played a leadership role in the design and execution of the “bank stress test” and the subsequent 
Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) programs. After leaving the FRBNY in  
March 2011, he became a partner at management consulting firm Oliver Wyman, where he has 
led stress testing for more than 25 banks and financial institutions. He participated in the 
European Central Bank’s Comprehensive Assessment in 2014 and conducted a 2016 assessment 
of the Bank of England’s stress -testing program for the International Monetary Fund . This 
Lessons Learned is based on an interview with Schuermann on September 28, 2021 . The full 
transcript can be accessed here. 
To effectively fight a crisis, policymakers need to understand its dimensions and scope 
and to gather as much credible data as possible to inform critical decisions.  
By late 2007, regulators had a sense of an impending crisis, but the scale of the crisis was not 
clear. In the fall of 2007, the FRBNY started checking into the state of nonregulated financial 
institutions, particularly the independent investment banks. The Fed eral Reserve (Fed) did 
not regulate these institutions, so its information was limited. Another issue was that many 
of the metrics and models used to assess the health of regulated banks were often self -
reported, and the process was not very transparent.  
Before the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), there was a surprising distance  between the risk 
monitoring functions at many financial institutions and their boards of directors and senior 
management. According to Schuermann, many boards were not well  informed regarding 
risks the company was taking, focusing mainly on profit and losses and not taking a dynamic 
view of the stresses on their operations. The stress testing that the Fed performed on the 
four major investment banks in summer 2008 changed this. It was the first time that 
institutions had to look at the scope of risk, exposures , and income in the mix, rather than 
just focus on losses, said Schuermann.  
Losses and income happen at different points in time. If you don ’t look at the patient 
very carefully, you could die in the second quarter and make enough money in the 
third or fourth; if you only measure the health of the patient at the end of the year, it 
looks fine. Meanwhile, the patient probably would ’ve died halfway through the year 
if you hadn’t paid close attention. 
The Fed's remit and view of the risk in these institutions expanded  after the crisis. In 
addition, m any of the programs that emerged from the c risis, such as CCAR, added 
provisions, such as the stress testing, that forced the institutions to pay attention. 
619

--- Page 4 ---
This was borne out during the COVID-19 pandemic, when many of the facilities the Fed set 
up in 2008 were reactivated to deal with the economic  impact of the lockdown. “ It was 
amazing how quickly the Fed reacted. And that was really, really helpful,” said Schuermann. 
“The COVID response was a great test of whether all the preparations we did in the last 10 
years and the changes would work,” said Schuermann. The Fed ran two stress tests of the 
banking system in 2020 as it responded to the crisis, and it showed the value  of that 
perspective, he explained:  
The stress test allowed you to say: “What if it gets even worse? A lot worse? How are 
the banks going to do?” And they would do fine. It was really important and helpful to 
have that sense of confidence that the banks w ould be able to withstand the COVID 
crisis, even if it got much worse.    
In 2008, i nstitutions had no incentive to plan an orderly wind -down and  avoid the 
shockwaves a large failure  would have on the economy. One of the legacies of the GFC, 
codified in the Dodd-Frank Act, was the “living will” provision that strengthened the hand of 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to wind down institutions. This ability to shut 
down a bank or systemically important nonbank institution in an orderly manner can be 
critical for the central bank and the resolution authority during crisis, noted Schuermann: 
The point is to buy yourself time, to slow things down. Having the structure in place 
beforehand to allow you to do things at a more measured pace is very helpful, and the 
Dodd-Frank Act did that. 
Don’t take anything on faith : When assessing a crisis, central banks should use their 
own models and be open-minded and flexible about how much worse things can get.  
Having done more than two dozen stress tests since the GFC, Schuermann said that one key 
lesson learned is the importance of the testing authority's use of its own models to form an 
opinion of what the losses might be at the banks and what the impact of the stressors might 
be on them. That was a very important part of the 2009 stress test. 
Regulators should be “really, really skeptical” about what the banks will report regarding 
their ability to remain resilient to multiple shocks. The bank is always going to be much more 
optimistic, Schuermann said. 
Suppose you and I were board members at a bank. We ’d like to converse very 
concretely when we ask the question: “Is my bank well capitalized? Could it withstand 
the stress?” and say: “Yes, we can lose a billion dollars and we’ll be fine.” But I think 
it’s more useful to talk about: What if the stock market crashed? What if 
unemployment doubled? What if GDP crashed?   
The flip side of that situation is a regime where the tests are so dependent on a model that 
the institutions become adept at reverse engineering the model to pass the tests, rather than 
model their own scenarios based on possible stresses. If the scenario is the same every year, 
620
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
banks will become very good at withstanding that one scenario, but not other scenarios that 
may matter, said Schuermann:  
Fed models still play, in my view, too large of a role in peacetime capital -setting. We 
still have a lot of con centration risk, systemic concentration risk, in supervisory 
models. There are about 50 or so models that the Fed has to determine capital for the 
US banking system. They’re opaque.  
I’m not arguing that they should actually be made public, because then everybody can 
just exactly engineer their portfolio to pass exactly those models. But I do worry how 
absolutely rigid the Fed is on having only those models determine the capital. That ’s 
still true today, and that makes me nervous. 
 _____________________________________ 
Dated: March 2024 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2021-34 
621
Lessons Learned: Til Schuermann Cardona