--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 4 
2024 
Lessons Learned: Karl-Philipp Wojick Lessons Learned: Karl-Philipp Wojick 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, and 
Methods Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Haggerty, Maryann (2024) "Lessons Learned: Karl-Philipp Wojick," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 
4, 154-156. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1606 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss4/8 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss4/8

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Karl-Philipp Wojcik 
By Maryann Haggerty 
Karl-Philipp Wojcik is the general counsel of the European Union’s (EU) Single Resolution 
Board (SRB), the central resolution authority within the EU’s banking union . The banking 
union, which as of January 1, 2023, encompasses the 20 eurozone countries, along with  
Bulgaria, was established as part of the financial system refor ms stemming from the Global 
Financial Crisis and the ensuing European sovereign debt crisis. The SRB’s stated mission is to 
ensure orderly resolution of failing banks, protect taxpayers from state bailouts, and promote 
financial stability. Wojcik became SRB general counsel in November 2020. Previously, he was a 
member of the EC’s legal service. This Lessons Learned summary is based on a November 2022 
interview with Wojcik; the full transcript may be found here. 
Crises often reveal regulatory or infrastructure gaps  in the financial stability 
framework that weaken it; the se gaps  should be addressed as expeditiously as 
possible.  
Wojcik joined the European Commission legal staff in May 201 0, amid the European 
sovereign debt crisis and bailout of Greece. The crisis brought to the forefront certain gaps 
in the EU and eurozone financial regulatory structure. Over the next few years, the EU 
established the banking union and its Single Superviso ry Mechanism (SSM), Single 
Resolution Board, and Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) to address issues in the banking 
system, especially insolvent banks.  
Wojcik explained,  
The crisis brought to the table questions such as lenders  of last resort and the 
institutional governance of the monetary union —which we know is not fully 
underpinned by a fiscal currency union. 
These things became very visible. The first years, in particular up to 2012, were years 
which I remember as years of acceleration of the crisis, and also years where one had 
to identify what really were the issues and what solutions existed.  
Wojcik recalled that identifying the issues was not strictly intuitive in the midst of the crisis. 
While resolution became a critical focus, it was not high on the radar at first: 
I think we have to first understand that before the financial crisis, bank resolution as 
such was not an area that really existed in many countries. It was only the FSB,  
[Financial Stability Board], which came with its key attributes in 2011, as a lesson of 
the crisis, which said more or less the following, “Well, we need administrative 
procedures, which are speedy and allow the management of a failing bank in such a 
way that financial stability is safeguarded, in such a way that values are preserved, in 
such a way that the taxpayer doesn’t need to bail out.” 
154

--- Page 4 ---
At a meeting in June 2012, the so-called Euro Summit, Wojcik recalled, the “heads of state of 
the eurozone [met] . . . and reached an agreement in principle on the creation of a banking 
union as one of the necessary institutional governance structures that the EU needed to have 
in place in order to stabilize the crisis.” 
He said, “ Therefore, I think this is the lesson. We need such a system, and the Single 
Resolution Mechanism basically is the tool at the European level to fill that gap.”  The 
proposed system presented novel legal questions that Wojcik and his team had to resolve 
within the framework of the existing European treaties. Wojcik said,  
One of the very difficult questions to tackle, which was linked to the legal basis, was: 
Would you want to have a central EU banking supervisor which is supervising the 
banks of all European member states, or only those who use the euro as a currency? 
That latter wa s the solution found later. However, it was not, let ’s say, the most 
straightforward solution, because basically it meant a sort of split of the member 
states into two groups. This also meant that the member that had the most important 
financial center of the European Union at the time, the UK with London, was not inside 
the chosen solution. 
Nevertheless, Wojcik saw the summit agreement as pivotal. He explained: 
In my personal perspective, the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism in 2013 
and then also the creation of the Single Resolution Board as a single resolution 
mechanism in 2014 were really the turning points. For me, I can say that basically at 
the end of 2014, the crisis was more or less addressed at the legislative level. 
Afterwards there was implementation, the measures were put in place, but I think 
that the hot crisis was over. 
When designing crisis-fighting tools or deciding which ones to use,  be simple and 
pragmatic, but don’t be afraid to be bold and creative. 
Because the SRM and SRB are relatively new, so are the legal challenges raised by new 
structures such as bail -in, the resolution tool meant to address some of the moral hazard 
worries connected to bailouts. For instance, Wojcik pointed out, “W e have to apply many of 
the rules for the very first time. That means there is not necessarily case law or practice on 
which we can build, which of course implies that you need to check the rules very carefully, 
that you need to think carefully about the options and the potential consequences.” Don’t be 
afraid, he counseled—there has to be a first time to apply new rules. 
He offered this advice to others dealing with novel legal challenges: 
I think what is extremely important as a lesson is to always look for pragmatic and 
simple solutions, and basically to build consensus around these solutions. In my view, 
what I’ve seen is the following: The simpler the solutions, the better to explain it is, 
the easier it is also to build consensus around it. That is, I think, one of the first main 
lessons. 
155
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
And another one is: Be creative. Don’t be shy, don’t think within the box, but be really 
creative, and be even a little bit daring , because often it ’s better to have a solution 
which may not be perfect, let ’s say, on all the matters, but it is bet ter than to be too 
shy and therefore to undershoot your goals. 
Dated: December 2024 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022-17 
 
156
Lessons Learned: Karl-Philip Wojick Haggerty