--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 2 
2024 
Lessons for the Discount Window from the March 2023 Bank Lessons for the Discount Window from the March 2023 Bank 
Failures Failures 
Susan McLaughlin 
Yale Program on Financial Stability, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, Policy Design, 
Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, Public Administration 
Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
McLaughlin, Susan (2024) "Lessons for the Discount Window from the March 2023 Bank Failures," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 2, 72-84. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1561 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/3 
This Note is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This note is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/
iss2/3

--- Page 3 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Lessons for the Discount Window  
from the March 2023 Bank Failures1 
Susan McLaughlin2  
July 23, 2024 
Abstract 
The speed of the bank runs that occurred in the United States in March 2023 took most by 
surprise. The ensuing policy debate about reform has focused very little on the role of the 
Federal Reserve’s discount and how it could be made more fit for purpose in mitigating risks 
to financial stability emanating from the banking system. Making the discount window a 
more effective financial stability tool  will require actions both to reduce the stigma 
associated with borrowing and improv e the operational agility an d readiness of the Fed as 
lender and banks as borrowers. A number of frictions exist that undermine the discount 
window’s effectiveness as a financial stability tool and amplify the stigma associated with 
discount window borrowing. These frictions may have been tolerable during bank runs that 
unfolded over a period of days but are problematic in a world where bank runs can transpire 
in a matter of hours. 
Keywords: discount window, financial stability, lender of last resort, liquidity, regulation 
  
 
1 A version of this note was published on the Yale School of Management’s Systemic Risk blog on September 19, 
2023. 
2 Susan McLaughlin is an executive fellow at the Yale Program on Financial Stability , Yale School of 
Management. In her 30-year career at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , she held senior management 
responsibility for discount window and collateral valuation operations during the Global Financial Crisis and 
for several emergency lending programs put in place to support the US economy during the onset of the COVID-
19 pandemic in 2020. 
72

--- Page 4 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Introduction 
In March 2023, the unprecedented pace of the runs on Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) and 
Signature Bank (Signature) took many by surprise. Much has already been done to identify 
ways to mitigate the risk of such runs and the threat they pose to financial sta bility. Indeed, 
in the US, several proposals to strengthen bank regulation and bank recovery and resolution 
planning have already been released for public comment, and work on possible 
modifications to the deposit insurance framework and to supervision of “novel activities” is 
already underway (FDIC 2023b; Fed 2023a; Fed and FDIC 2023; Fed, FDIC, and OCC 2023). 
One part of the financial stability toolkit that has been less frequently mentioned is the ability 
of the Federal Reserve (Fed) to act as lender of last resort to the banking system through the 
discount window. While lender -of-last-resort tools cannot by themselves ensure financial 
stability—and are most powerful when well aligned with good bank regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks —they can help addr ess banks’ short -term liquidity needs and 
mitigate bank run risk and contagion risk. The events of March 2023 provide an opportunity 
to reflect on ways to improve banks’ willingness and ability to use the discount window, 
which can be particularly important in a world where runs can occur over hours rather than 
days. This note draws on observations about the SVB and Signature failures to offer some 
suggestions on steps that can be taken to reduce discount window stigma , improve 
operational readiness and agility, and meet the challenges presented by today’s fast-moving 
banking system.  
What is the discount window? 
A foundational responsibility of any central bank is to serve as the lender of last resort to the 
banking system to facilitate the ongoing flow of credit to the economy. In the United States, 
Section 10B of the Federal Reserve Act authorizes the Fed to extend credit (on both an 
intraday and overnight basis) to US-chartered depository institutions (including commercial 
banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions) and US branches of foreign banking 
organizations (Fed 1913). (This note uses the term “banks” throughout to include all these 
types of institutions.) 
The Fed’s discount window provides overnight and term credit to banks as needed to 
support the ongoing flow of credit to US households and businesses. The Fed operationalizes 
discount window lending through its 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks, all of which rely on 
the same technology infrastructure, follow the same collateral policy and lending guidelines, 
and operate with a common set of lending documents (Fed n.d.a.; Fed n.d.e.).  
A bank that requires a discount window loan borrows from its local Reserve Bank on a 
collateralized basis. A bank’s need for a discount window loan typically stems from a late -
day funding need owing to an unexpected withdrawal or a failure to receive expected funds. 
Sometimes, it occurs as a result of a bank’s temporary inability to repay its intraday 
borrowing from the Reserve Bank by the end of the day. However, the need for credit can 
arise at any point in the day. 
73
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
There are three types of discount windo w credit: primary, secondary, and seasonal credit  
(Fed n.d.b.). Primary credit loans serve as the principal safety valve for ensuring adequate 
liquidity in the banking system and are available to banks that are in generally sound 
financial condition, as de termined by their primary regulator. Secondary credit loans are 
available to banks not eligible for primary credit, and these loans come with a higher rate, 
higher haircuts, and a shorter term. Primary credit loans are supposed to be granted with 
“no questions asked”; secondary credit loans are subject to more restrictions on usage of the 
funds borrowed. Seasonal credit is available to banks with deposits of less than $500 million 
that can demonstrate liquidity needs of a seasonal nature. Primary credit typically makes up 
the bulk of discount window loans outstanding. 
While the discount window is an important tool to ensure that banks have access to the 
liquidity they need to intermediate credit to support the economy, the events of March 2023 
showed that st igma remains. As concerns about the health of many regional banks in the 
United States prompted an acceleration in depositor withdrawals in early March, borrowing 
from Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) increased sharply relative to discount window 
borrowing, and we subsequently learned that many banks were utterly unprepared to use 
the discount window as a source of backstop liquidity  (Cecchetti, Schoenholtz, and White 
2023; Saphir 2023). The Fed could take several steps to reduce the stigma associated with 
primary credit and improve banks’ incentives to use it as a contingency funding source. 
These steps would strengthen the effectiveness of this tool in mitigating run risk for banks 
of all sizes.  
It is useful to recall that for much of the Fed’s history bef ore 2003, discount window credit 
was extended at a below -market rate—but only when the borrower had exhausted other 
sources of funding. This attestation, combined with the significant administrative oversight 
and monitoring that also accompanied the extens ion of discount window credit, served to 
stigmatize discount window borrowing. Historically, policymakers had concerns about the 
moral hazard risk associated with possible bank overuse of the window, as well as concerns 
about how to ensure that Fed credit was not fueling speculative activity  (Fed 195 3, Fed 
1954). These concerns gave rise to a strategy of “constructive ambiguity” among some Fed 
policymakers—dating back to the Great Depression —regarding the discount window, in 
which there was no precommitment about its availability to any bank on any given day. This 
attitude is perhaps understandable in the period preceding the establishment of rigorous 
prudential supervision for all types of banking organizations operating in the United States. 
However, it se rved to discourage use of the discount window and has created stigma that 
continues to the present day. 
In 2003, the Fed endeavored to reboot and destigmatize the discount window by establishing 
two main tiers of credit: a primary tier that would be lent on a “no questions asked” basis to 
sound institutions at an above -market rate and a secondary tier that would be lent to less -
sound institutions on more restrictive terms (Madigan and Nelson 2002). Fed policymakers 
have since 2003 attempted on many occasion s to communicate to the public that primary 
credit is a legitimate source of funding that banks may use when needed with “no questions 
asked.” Indeed, since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the spring of 2020, the Fed has 
redoubled its efforts to signal the message that primary credit should be used when needed; 
74
Journal of Financial Crises McLaughlin

--- Page 6 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
it extended the term of primary credit to 90 days and reduced the spread of the primary 
credit rate over the upper bound of the fed funds rate target range to zero.3 
Yet stigma is still presen t despite this communication. Why? Observers have pointed to the 
greater disclosure required under 2010’s Dodd -Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act, as well as the presence of cheaper alternatives to primary credit such as the 
FHLBs.4 But one key driver of stigma that gets less attention is the mixed messaging that has 
come from the Fed and other banking regulators on the topic of discount window usage. As 
discussed in more detail below, supervisory and regulatory practices, requirements, a nd 
language are often at odds with the “no questions asked” policy stance on primary credit.  
Steps to reduce stigma 
Communicate clearly and regularly to the public that primary credit is a legitimate 
source of liquidity for banks to utilize when needed. 
A more comprehensive communication strategy that aligns words and actions is needed to 
combat discount window stigma and overcome the long memories of bank managers, market 
participants, reporters, and even bank regulatory staff themselves that “di scount window 
borrowing” is to be questioned or avoided. When bank treasurers are grilled by their risk 
management committees or their regulators about why they borrowed from the window, 
this perpetuates stigma. When market commentary and press pieces speculate about which 
bank was behind the borrowing activity seen in the Fed’s weekly H.4.1 data release, this 
perpetuates stigma. 5 These dynamics will be difficult to disrupt without clear, intentional, 
and repeated communication from the Fed about its stanc e on primary credit. This 
communication must be mirrored in supervisory and regulatory practices and in 
adjustments to how primary credit is administered. 
Recalibrate supervisory and regulatory practices and language to support the 
communication strategy about primary credit.  
US bank supervisory and regulatory practices undermine the “no questions asked” message 
by disincentivizing primary credit borrowing  relative to other funding alternatives . For 
example, the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) requires banks to hold high-quality liquid assets 
(HQLA) sufficient to cover their expected net outflows over a 30-day period. In the US, banks 
 
3 Section 10B of the Federal Reserve Act restricts discount window lending to a maximum tenor of four months; 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System has some discretion within that constraint to set the 
maximum term (Fed 1913). 
4 Leaving aside the question of whether the large -scale lending by FHLBs to banks such as SVB and Signature 
is consistent with the policy objective for which the FHLBs were established in 1932, the fact is that many banks 
prefer to borrow from their local FHLB rather than their Federal Reserve Bank, as it is often cheaper than the 
discount window and does not carry the same stigma.  
5 The Federal Reserve took an important step to mitigate this type of speculation in March 2020 by 
discontinuing the district -level reporting of discount window borrowing on its weekly report on factors 
affecting reserve balances. See Fed 2020b. 
75
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
with assets of over $50 billion  are subject to either a standard or modified LCR . But assets 
considered HQLA  by US bankin g regulators  are limited to  certain types of marketable 
securities that represent a relatively small share of the assets that can be pledged to the 
window as collateral ( Fed n.d.a.; Fed n.d.d.; OCC, Fed, and FDIC 2014 ). Banks receive no 
credit for other types of assets, such as loans, that are prepositioned at the discount window, 
even though these assets can be monetized on a same -day basis through a primary credit 
loan.  
Additionally, s upervisory guidance limits the ability of a banking organization to re ly on 
primary credit as a source of liquidity for its depository institutions in its recovery and 
resolution plan (R&RP) to “only a few days,” even though the process of recovery or bridging 
to a resolution outcome could take longer than that. 6 And banks are not required to 
incorporate primary credit into their contingency funding plans (CFPs) as a backstop source 
of funding. Recalibrating supervisory expectations to better align with the idea that primary 
credit is a legitimate source of short-term funding would help to improve the incentives for 
banks to use it. 
Use supervisory authority to require banks to be prepared to use the discount window 
if needed, as a matter of prudent contingency liquidity planning.  
In the US, the onus is currently on banks to  make the effort to obtain access to the discount 
window and conduct test borrowings periodically, ahead of a need to borrow. Many banks 
do this; however, the postmortem reports by the Fed on SVB and the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) on Sign ature make clear that neither bank was operationally 
prepared to use the discount window when they needed it (Barr 2023; FDIC 2023a). SVB had 
identified the discount window as a source of funding in its CFP, but the bank had not tested 
its discount window borrowing arrangements in the year before its failure and was not 
prepared to manage within the cutoff times for movement of collateral within its time zone. 
Signature’s CFP was overly reliant on the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York and did not 
include the Fed’s discount window (Ostrander 2023). Signature had not tested its discount 
window borrowing arrangements for five years before its failure and tried repeatedly in its 
final days to pledge collateral that was, based on publicly available information, clearly 
ineligible.  
A chorus of Fed speakers have since reinforced the need for banks to be operationally ready 
to use the discount window. On July 28, 2023, the Fed and other US banking regulatory 
agencies took a step in this direction by issuing amended supervisory guidance for Category 
II and III firms7 that emphasizes the discount window’s value as a contingency funding tool 
and encourages banks to take the steps to be operationally ready to borrow, including small-
value test borrowing and prepositioning collateral  (Fed, FDIC, NCUA , and OCC  2023). But 
guidance is not a requirement and still leaves some discretion to banks, which seems 
suboptimal from a systemic risk perspective. 
 
6 See also the joint Federal Reserve Board–Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation February 2019 guidance for 
global systemically important banks (Fed and FDIC 2019).  
7 For a description of the institutions that are governed by Category II and III standards, see OCC (2019).  
76
Journal of Financial Crises McLaughlin

--- Page 8 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Why not require any bank that has access to primary credit to include it as a source of 
funding in its CFP? Making this inclusion a requirement would increase the likelihood that 
banks are ready to borrow from the discount window when and if needed. Further, any bank 
that is relying on primary credit in its CFP could be required to do the test borrowing and 
collateral prepositioni ng needed to ensure readiness to borrow. Testing will ensure that 
banks are aware of the mechanics of the borrowing and collateral -pledging processes, 
operational cutoff times in their time zones, and collateral eligibility guidelines. Readiness to 
use the discount window should be a supervisory expectation for contingency liquidity risk 
management against which banks should be assessed and, if found to be noncompliant, 
required to take corrective action. 
Consider ways to decouple administration of the prim ary and secondary credit 
programs to support the destigmatization of primary credit. 
The 2003 redesign of the discount window was intended to destigmatize primary credit 
borrowing by distinguishing it from troubled banks’ secondary credit borrowing. But the fact 
that primary credit is administered in tandem with secondary credit may in fact have 
contributed to stigma; much of the Fed’s communication on its lender -of-last-resort tools 
speaks in terms of “the discount window” or simply “advances” in a manner that does not 
distinguish between the two programs. Consider the following language from Section 14.1 
of the Federal Reserve Operating Circular No. 10, which governs discount window lending: 
“The (Reserve) Bank is not obligated by the Lending Agreement or otherwise to make, 
increase, renew or extend any Advance to the Borrower” (Federal Reserve Banks 2023, 10). 
Such language appears to reflect wariness about lending to unhealthy banks, which seems 
entirely appropriate messaging for secondary credit. But this messaging is not consistent 
with the idea of a “no questions asked” primary credit backstop and reflects the lingering 
effects of the constructive ambiguity doctrine that has served to stigmatize discount window 
borrowing over time. Indeed, this language was embedded in the Federal Reserve Act itself, 
well before the 2003 redesign of the discount window. 8 Clarity on the central bank’s stance 
on primary credit could be supported by administering the primary and secondary credit 
programs separately and communicating about them more distinctly.9 
Develop and communicate a longer -term approach to pricing primary credit that is 
intended to mitigate stigma.  
Part of the 2003 redesign of the discount window included pricing of primary and secondary 
credit at a p enalty rate, defined as a spread above the fed funds target rate. 10 Initially, the 
spread for the primary credit rate was 100 basis points over fed funds; with the onset of the 
 
8 The FDIC Improvement Act of 1991, passed in response to the savings and loan crisis, amended the Federal 
Reserve Act to add Section 10B(b)(4), which states: “A Federal Reserve bank shall have no obligation to make, 
increase, renew, or extend any advance or disco unt under this Act to any depository institution” (US Gov’t 
1991). 
9 Other central banks generally do not have different tiers of access in their lender -of-last-resort standing 
facilities; financial institutions are either eligible or not eligible.  
10 Since the Federal Open Market Committee’s adoption of a target range for the policy rate in December 2008, 
the top of the target rate has been the reference point for the spread.  
77
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Global Financial Crisis, the Fed reduced the spread to 50 basis points in Augus t 2007 and 
then to 25 basis points in March 2008 as dollar funding market stress intensified (Fed 2007; 
Fed 2008). The spread returned to 50 basis points in February 2010  when the crisis -era 
terms for primary credit lending were partially reversed (Fed 2010). In March 2020, as part 
of a set of measures to  support the flow of credit to households and business es amid the 
onset of the global COVID-19 pandemic, the Fed reduced the spread to 0 basis points, where 
it has remained since (Fed 2020a).  
This lineage raises interesting questions about the classical Bagehot idea of a penalty rate 
for lender-of-last-resort facilities (Bagehot 1873). A penalty rate is surely appropriate for 
standing facilities that lend to undercapitalized institutions, or that are established for crisis 
liquidity facilities that lend to a wide range of borrowers not usually eligible for central bank 
liquidity. But is a penalty rate consistent with the idea of short -term liquidity provision to 
sound banks with “no questions asked”? And if so, is there a level at which the penalty rate 
can be set that would minimize stigma? Should the penalty vary in stress and normal funding 
market environments? Consideration should also be given to the appropriate relationship of 
the primary credit rate to  the pricing of other sources of contingency funding available to 
banks. Does it make sense that banks can borrow more cheaply from the FHLBs, for 
example?11 What is the appropriate relationship between the primary credit rate and the 
lending rates at FHLBs (net of dividends) and other sources of contingency funding for 
banks? Can that relationship be calibrated to minimize stigma? A framework for pricing 
primary credit that answers these questions would be an extremely useful component of a 
broader communication strategy about discount window borrowing. 
Steps to improve operational readiness and agility 
In a world of intraday runs, it seems worth considering ways to make it easier and faster for 
banks to use primary credit when they need it. The Fed could take  several steps to modify 
the processes for establishing access to, and using, primary credit to better align that funding 
with the speed at which liquidity needs can arise. 
Establish access early in a bank’s life cycle.  
The discount window is an important financial stability tool to mitigate systemic risk 
transmission in the banking system. However, discount window access is not automatic; a 
bank must clea r multiple hurdles before it can borrow from the discount window. First, a 
bank must affirmatively apply for a master account on the Federal Reserve’s books —or 
identify a correspondent bank with a master account through which to operate—as discount 
window borrowing and collateral pledging are executed via banks’ Fed accounts. Next, the 
bank must apply for discount window access, which requires the execution of several legal 
agreements and resolutions. Finally, the bank must pledge collateral. 
 
11 This question is admittedly beyond the Fed’s remit but is relevant to the current debate on FHLB reform.  
78
Journal of Financial Crises McLaughlin

--- Page 10 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
This process is burdensome and prompts the question: Why not make the establishment of 
Fed master accounts and discount window arrangements an up-front part of the process for 
chartering a bank or establishing a branch in the US? The Fed has historically been quite 
careful in granting master accounts to banks given the risks account activity can pose to a 
Reserve Bank if the bank is not in sound condition. But perhaps newly established banks 
without a credit risk management track record could receive a master account that provides 
only the ability to borrow at the discount window up to the margined value of collateral they 
have pledged and does not provide access to other Fed services, such as intraday credit. 
Automate the loan approval process for primary credit loans.  
Once a bank has discount window access, the loan request and approval process is still quite 
manual. A bank requests the loan by telephone and waits for confirmation that it has pledged 
sufficient collateral value to support the amount requested. The Fed recently announced it 
is taking steps to automate the loan request process; another step it could take is to automate 
the loan approval process for primary credit loans (Fed 2023b). Automating the process of 
confirming that a bank has  sufficient unencumbered collateral value to support the loan 
requested could speed the loan approval process modestly and, perhaps more importantly, 
provide another way to signal that primary credit is available with “no questions asked.” An 
ability to override the automated check manually could be created to deal with cases in 
which the condition of the bank is in question. 
It is useful to note that a shift to this “automatic” access paradigm for primary credit would  
need to be accompanied by improvements in the quality and frequency of supervisory 
updates to the national supervisory ratings database. This is because counterparty risk 
management for discount window lending happens primarily at the supervisory level. All US 
banking supervisory agencies are responsible for monitoring and rating bank safety and 
soundness—and for providing ratings for the banks they oversee to the national database. 
These ratings feed into Reserve Banks’ assessments of borrower condition a nd drive 
determinations about primary and secondary credit eligibility (as well as intraday credit 
access). There is a long history of poor and/or stale assessments of bank condition (IndyMac, 
Washington Mutual, etc.) before March 2023. At times of stress,  the boundary between 
solvency and insolvency can be fuzzy; bank supervisors that are monitoring the bank’s 
condition on an ongoing basis are best placed to provide an assessment of it. 
Explore ways to expand the feasibility of late-day pledges of collateral to the discount 
window.  
While all eligible types of securities collateral can be pledged on a same-day basis in theory, 
in practical terms, the devil is in the details. Figure 1 summarizes the information on cutoff 
times for securities pledges that is provided on the Fed’s webpage  on pledging discount 
window collateral as of September 2023  (Fed n.d.a). As Figure 1 shows , depending on the 
location of a bank’s collateral and the time zone in which the bank is operating, a late -day 
pledge may or may not be feasible in practical terms. Indeed, SVB ran up against this issue in 
March 2023. 
79
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 1: Operational Cutoff Times for a Bank’s Securities Pledges to a Reserve Bank 
Type of pledge Cutoff time to request same-day pledge 
Move of securities among a borrower’s or 
correspondent’s own accounts on the Fedwire 
Securities Service 
7:00 pm Eastern / 4:00 pm Pacific 
Move of securities between two participants’ 
accounts on the Fedwire Securities Service 
3:45 pm Eastern / 12:45 pm Pacific 
Pledge of securities held at Depository Trust 
Company 
5:00 pm Eastern / 2:00 pm Pacific 
Pledge of securities held at Euroclear 12:15 pm Eastern / 9:15 am Pacific 
Pledge of securities held at Clearstream 1:00 pm Eastern / 10:00 am Pacific 
Note: Cutoff time assumes no request for extension is made by the pledging bank and granted by the Fed.  
Source: Fed n.d.a. 
For this reason, the Fed has long urged banks to preposition collateral at the discount 
window so it is there if needed. However, there may be circumstances in which a bank loses 
access to funding on a given day and may need to move collateral to the Fed to support 
borrowing. The ability to execute same -day pledges may have been less of an issue in the 
past, when bank runs materialized over a period of days. But in a world where runs can occur 
within the space of hours, it is worth exploring opportunities to expand the windows within 
which pledges can be effected late in the US business day. Importantly, this is not a discount 
window infrastructure issue; rather, it reflects the design of the broader wholesale payments 
infrastructure, of which the Fedwire Securities Service and the custodial banks are part, and 
which was designed for a different financial market environment than exists today. 
We also saw in March 2023 that the process of getting collateral from FHLBs to Federal 
Reserve Banks was time-consuming owing to a combination of legal and operational issues. 
Indeed, in the case of Signature, special ad hoc legal arrangements were required to effect a 
timely pledge of collateral to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in a manner that would 
adequately secure the Reserve Bank’s loan  (NYS DFS 2023) . To the extent that banks 
continue to pledge large amounts of Fed -eligible collateral to their local FHLB s, it seems 
advisable to begin work now to address any outstanding legal or operational questions 
associated with collateral transferability between FHLBs and the Federal Reserve System—
before the next liquidity event occurs. 
Explore ways t o incentivize or even require banks to preposition a certain share of 
their loan portfolios as collateral pledges to their local Reserve Banks. 
Loans, which represent the majority of assets pledged to the Federal Reserve System and the 
bulk of assets pledg ed by smaller banks, can take even longer to pledge to a Reserve Bank 
than securities. Loans eligible to be pledged as collateral by banks must be pledged through 
80
Journal of Financial Crises McLaughlin

--- Page 12 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
a held-in-custody arrangement. This process can take weeks to set up properly to ensure the 
Fed has perfected its security interest in the collateral. So, prepositioning is particularly 
critical for loans, which are pledged in large part by banks that are not large enough to have 
been deemed “systemically important” but whose activities can noneth eless give rise to 
financial instability in today’s environment. 
Conclusion 
While there are surely legal, technological, cultural, and risk management issues to overcome 
in moving to a more agile and truly “no questions asked” paradigm for primary credit lending 
to banks, the recommendations offered in this note would collectively help to reduce 
discount window stigma—and to avoid outcomes in which a bank needs liquidity before it 
has put the necessary operational arrangements in place. Timely discount wind ow 
borrowing alone would not have saved SVB or Signature, given their risky business models, 
concentration and interest rate risks, and the associated solvency issues present in both 
institutions. But it might have slowed the run and mitigated contagion ri sk, while buying 
valuable time to execute resolution processes that were less costly for the Deposit Insurance 
Fund. And in the case of an otherwise solvent bank that is experiencing liquidity stress, 
timely access to discount window liquidity can make the  difference between recovery and 
failure. The frictions in discount window access and usage described here seem to reflect the 
legacy of the constructive ambiguity doctrine, and they continue to contribute to the stigma 
associated with discount window borr owing. While these frictions were perhaps tolerable 
during runs that unfolded over a period of days, they are problematic in a March 2023 world, 
where runs can occur in a matter of hours. 
  
81
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
References 
Bagehot, Walter. 1873. Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. 4th ed. London: 
Henry S. King & Co.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14239/ 
Barr, Michael S. 2023. “Review of the Federal Reserve’s Supervision and Regulation of 
Silicon Valley Bank.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4025 
Cecchetti, Steven G., Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Lawrence J. White. 2023. “Reforming the 
Federal Home Loan Bank System.” Money, Banking and Financial Markets blog, August 2, 
2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4035 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2023a. “FDIC’s Supervision of Signature 
Bank.” April 28, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4037 
———. 2023b. “FDIC Releases Comprehensive Overview of Deposit Insurance System, 
Including Options for Deposit Insurance Reform.” Press release, May 1, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4036 
Federal Reserve Banks. 2023. “Operating Circular No. 10: Lending.” Effective August 28, 
2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4032 
Federal Reserve System (Fed). 1913. Federal Reserve Act, Section 10(B). “Advances to 
Individual Member Banks.” 12 U.S.C. § 347b.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4026/ 
———. 1953. “The Discount and Discount Rate Mechanism.” A Group of Special Studies 
Prepared by Selected Board and Reserve Bank Research Personnel, May 29, 1953. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4027 
———. 1954. “The Discount and Discount Rate Mechanism.” Statements of Associate 
Economists of the Federal Open Market Committee before the Conference of Presidents of 
the Federal Reserve Banks, June 21, 1954. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4028/ 
———. 2007. “Federal Reserve Board Discount Rate Action.” Press release, August 17, 
2007. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/13003 
———. 2008. “Federal Reserve Announces Two Initiatives Designed to Bolster Market 
Liquidity and Promote Orderly Market Functioning.” Press release, March 16, 2008.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/7754/ 
82
Journal of Financial Crises McLaughlin

--- Page 14 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
———. 2010. “Federal Reserve Approves Modifications to the Terms of Its Discount 
Window Lending Programs.” Press release, February 18, 2010. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4029 
———. 2020a. “Federal Reserve Actions to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and 
Businesses.” Press release, March 15, 2020.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/12000/ 
———. 2020b. “H.4.1: Factors Affecting Reserve Balances.” Federal Reserve Statistical 
Release, March 19, 2020.  
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4039 
———. 2023a. “Federal Reserve Board Provides Additional Information on Its Program to 
Supervise Novel Activities in the Banks It Oversees.” Press release, August 8, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4033 
———. 2023b. “Forthcoming Amendments to Operating Circular 10: Lending.” Discount 
Window and Payment System Risk, July 10, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4043 
———. n.d.a. “Collateral Information.” Accessed August 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4103 
———. n.d.b. “Discount Window Lending.” Accessed August 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4040 
———. n.d.c. “Discount Window/Payment System Risk.” Accessed August 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4044 
———. n.d.d. “Discount Window Readiness.” Accessed May 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4034 
———. n.d.e. “The Primary & Secondary Lending Programs.” Accessed August 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4046 
Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Fed and FDIC). 2019. 
“Final Guidance for the 2019.” FRB Docket No. OP–1644. Federal Register 84, no. 23 
(February 4, 2019): 1438–49. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4041 
———. 2023. “Agencies Propose Guidance to Enhance Resolution Planning at Large 
Banks.” Joint press release, August 29, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4030 
Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency (Fed, FDIC, and OCC). 2023. “Agencies Request Comment on 
Proposed Rules to Strengthen Capital Requirements for Large Banks.” Joint press release, 
83
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
July 27, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4031 
Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union 
Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (Fed, FDIC, NCUA, and OCC). 
2023. “Addendum to the Interagency Policy Statement on Funding and Liquidity Risk 
Management: Importance of Contingency Funding Plans.” July 28, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4042 
Madigan, Brian F., and William R. Nelson. 2002. “Proposed Revision to the Federal 
Reserve’s Discount Window Lending Programs.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 88, no. 7 (July): 
313–19. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4047 
New York State Department of Financial Services (NYS DFS). 2023. “Internal Review of the 
Supervision and Closure of Signature Bank.” April 28, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4048 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). 2019. Applicability Thresholds for 
Regulatory Capital and Liquidity Requirements: Final Rule. OCC Bulletin 2019-52, 
November 1, 2019. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4049 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Reserve System, and Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (OCC, Fed, and FDIC). 2014. Liquidity Coverage Ratio: Liquidity Risk 
Measurement Standards. Final Rule, October 10, 2014. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/13123/ 
Ostrander, Richard. 2023. “Remarks on the Panel ‘Bank Crisis Framework: Learning from 
Experience.’” Speech by Federal Reserve Bank of New York general counsel and head of the 
legal group at the Paris Meeting on International Monetary Law of the International Law 
Association (MOCOMILA), Paris, France, June 17, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4050 
Saphir, Ann. 2023. “Insight: Many Small US Banks Not Ready to Borrow from Fed in an 
Emergency.” Reuters, August 4, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4051 
US Government. 1991. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991. 
Public Law 102-242. December 19, 1991.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/11705/ 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
84
Journal of Financial Crises McLaughlin