--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 2 
2024 
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit for Reconfiguring FHLB FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit for Reconfiguring FHLB 
Lending Lending 
Steven Kelly 
Yale Program on Financial Stability, Yale School of Management 
Susan McLaughlin 
Yale Program on Financial Stability, Yale School of Management 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale Program on Financial Stability, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Finance and Financial Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation 
Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kelly, Steven; McLaughlin, Susan; and Metrick, Andrew (2024) "FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit for 
Reconfiguring FHLB Lending," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 2, 85-104. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1562 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/4 
This Note is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This note is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/
iss2/4

--- Page 3 ---
POLICY NOTE  
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit  
for Reconfiguring FHLB Lending1 
Steven Kelly,2 Susan McLaughlin,3 and Andrew Metrick4 
July 23, 2024 
Abstract 
In the United States, the lender-of-last-resort tool is the Federal Reserve’s discount window. 
Despite countervailing policy efforts , substantial market stigma remains associated with 
borrowing from the discount window. It is in this context that market participants have come 
to view the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) as an alternative to the Fed’s discount 
window for backstop liquidity needs—despite the FHLBs’ relatively constrained abilities to 
play this role. Notably, however, the FHLBs don’t just benefit from discount window stigma; 
the FHLBs reinforce discount window stigma with their subsidized pricing. 
The FHLBs are government -sponsored enterprises —and as such can fund themselves at 
government rates—but they operate as cooperatives that are privately owned by the banks 
and other financial institutions eligible to borrow from them. Under t his setup, the FHLBs 
partially reimburse their borrowing members by distributing the bulk of their dividends 
based on the amount a member borrowed in a given quarter. This dividend structure reduces 
the “all-in” cost for FHLB borrowers—changing the cost of borrowing relative to the discount 
window and incentivizing banks to rely more on the FHLB System structurally than is 
optimal from a financial stability perspective (which favors using the Fed). 
Given the Federal Housing Finance Agency’s (FHFA’s) recently expressed desire to focus on 
realigning the FHLB System toward its housing mission, the FHFA should redirect the FHLBs’ 
favorable advance rates and dividends toward members that are most serving the FHFA ’s 
housing goals. Redirecting FHLB dividends away from simply subsidizing FHLB borrowing 
could support housing finance (and the banks providing housing finance) while also 
directionally getting the FHLB System out of the way of the Fed’s financial stability mandate 
to be an effective lender of last resort.  
Keywords: discount window, emergency liquidity assistance, Federal Home Loan Banks, 
Federal Reserve, stigma 
  
 
1 A version of this note was published on the Yale School of Management’s Systemic Risk blog on January 18, 
2024. The authors thank Vincient Arnold for his fantastic research support. 
2 Steven Kelly, associate director of research, YPFS, Yale School of Management, steven.kelly@yale.edu . 
3 Susan McLaughlin, executive fellow, YPFS, Yale School of Management, susan.mclaughlin@yale.edu . 
4 Andrew Metrick, Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management and program director, YPFS, Yale 
School of Management, andrew.metrick@yale.edu. 
85

--- Page 4 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Introduction  
A core part of the financial stability tool kit in any country’s financial system is the central 
bank’s lender-of-last-resort tools—namely, the liquidity backstops that the central bank 
stands ready to provide to the banking system to weather temporary disruptions to funding 
markets access. Such backstops are typically provided both to bridge temporary disruptions 
in individual banks’ access to funding and more extended disruptions to funding markets. In 
the United States, the lender-of-last-resort tool is the Federal Reserve’s discount window. 
Yet, for a number of reasons well documented elsewhere, substantial stigma is associated 
with borrowing from the discount window (Armantier, Lee, and Sarkar 2015) . Perhaps for 
this reason, over time, some market participants have come to view the Federal Home Loan 
Banks (FHLBs) as an alternative to the Fed’s discount window for backstop liquidity needs, 
even terming them “lender of next-to-last-resort”—despite their limited ability to play this 
role relative to the Fed. The FHLBs are government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) that 
borrow in debt markets primarily to make loans—termed “advances”—against real estate 
and government collateral to their nearly 6,500 members, which include credit unions, 
thrifts, insurance companies, community development financial institutions (CDFIs), and 
effectively the entire banking system (US Government 2008a). (For this article, we focus on 
the FHLBs’ lending to banks.) In addition to benefiting from discount window stigma, the 
FHLB System reinforces discount window stigma because of its ability to pass on subsidized 
funding to its members.  
There is little public data on the interest rates the FHLBs charge, and what is public often 
appears to be comparable to or more expensive than the Fed. Yet, the FHLBs partially 
reimburse their borrowing members by distributing the bulk of their dividends based on the 
amount a member borrowed in a given quarter—a refund that is actively marketed to 
members. We demonstrate this dynamic and share examples of FHLB marketing materials. 
This dividend structure reduces the “all-in” cost for FHLB borrowers, changing its 
comparison to the discount window’s primary credit rate and incentivizing banks to 
structurally rely more on the FHLB System than is optimal from a financial stability 
perspective. 
On November 7, 2023, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) released a 
comprehensive review of the FHLB System, in anticipation of the System’s centennial in 
2032. The report examines the current FHLB System against its core missions, offers a vision 
for a modernization, and reflects on lessons from the March 2023 banking stress, noting that:  
The ongoing market stress highlighted the need for a clearer distinction between the 
appropriate role of the FHLBanks, which provide funding to support their members’ 
liquidity needs across the economic cycle, and that of the Federal Reserve, which 
maintains the primary financing facility for troubled institutions with immediate, 
emergency liquidity needs. (FHFA 2023) 
FHFA regulation already makes clear that the mission of the FHLB System is to provide 
financial services to its members to “assist and enhance” the financing of housing and 
86
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
POLICY NOTE  
community lending (FHFA 2010). Given the FHFA’s clear desire to focus on realigning the 
FHLB System toward its core missions and away from its tendency to function as a quasi-
central bank, now is the time to redirect its favorable advance rates and dividends toward 
the mission and away from simply subsidizing borrowing. 
Roles of the Discount Window and the FHLB System 
Importantly, the FHFA report pushes back against the problematic concept of FHLBs playing 
the role of lender of next-to-last resort (Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame 2008; FHFA 2023), noting 
[emphasis ours throughout] that: 
The role of the FHLBanks in providing secured advances must be distinguished from the 
Federal Reserve’s financing facilities . . . Due to operational and financing limitations of 
the market intermediation process, the FHLBanks cannot functionally serve as lender of 
last resort, particularly for large, troubled members that can have significant borrowing 
needs over a short period of time. (FHFA 2023) 
And further,  
The reliance of some large, troubled members on the FHLBanks, rather than the Federal 
Reserve, for liquidity during periods of significant financial stress may be inconsistent 
with the relative responsibilities of the FHLBanks and the Federal Reserve. (FHFA 2023)  
The Federal Reserve has a statutory mandate to serve as lender of last resort to the banking 
system, in connection with its ability to create bank reserves, which enables it to meet highly 
elastic demand for liquidity in times of financial market stress. By contrast, the FHFA report 
notes that the FHLBs’ lending capacity is constrained by their ability to raise debt financing 
in the capital markets, and that the FHLBs are limited in their ability “to meet sizable liquidity 
requests late in the day or after debt markets close” (FHFA 2023). Yet, in March 2023, some 
troubled banks “were effectively using the FHLBs as their lender of last resort” (FHFA 2023). 
See Figures 1 and 2 for FHLB System advances and Fed lending, respectively, in recent 
history. 
  
87
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 6 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Figure 1: Total FHLB System Advances (in $ billions)  
 
Source: Federal Reserve; quarterly data as of end of quarter. 
Figure 2: Total Discount Window & TAF Lending (in $ billions) 
  
Note: In addition to discount window primary credit volume, this graph charts volume at the Term Auction 
Facility (TAF). The TAF was a Fed program during the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–2009 to auction discount 
window credit and was open to all banks eligible for primary credit (Fed n.d.b). 
Source: Federal Reserve; weekly data, Wednesday level. 
As described in McLaughlin (2024), some banks were completely unprepared to borrow 
from the discount window as growing deposit outflows increased their needs for liquidity in 
the spring of 2023. The discount window can provide credit against a much broader universe 
of collateral than the FHLBs, which can lend only against housing-related collateral and 
government securities (Fed 2021; US Government 2008a). 
3/15/2023 
3/25/2020 
10/29/2008 
3/11/2009 
88
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Banks’ operational readiness to use the discount window and to move collateral from the 
FHLBs to their regional Federal Reserve Bank was certainly an issue in the spring of 2023. 
In its report, the FHFA says it (1) will provide guidance to the FHLBs to work with members 
to ensure all have established the capability to borrow from the discount window, and (2) 
expects all FHLBs to establish agreements with their local Reserve Bank to support timely 
pledges to the discount window (FHFA 2023). But these measures do not go far enough to 
realign the relative roles of the discount window and FHLB advances. 
Discount Window Stigma Relative to FHLBs 
It is well known that discount window borrowing continues to carry stigma. One driver of 
this stigma is the requirement, established by the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, that the Fed must 
disclose all details of all discount window loans made, including borrower names—albeit 
with a two-year lag. The FHLB System, despite its public status, faces no such requirement—
which likely appeals to potential borrowers. Moreover, the Fed discloses total discount 
window borrowing weekly, and the market can break this down  by Fed district—which 
helps it parse potential suspects for having taken a loan (Fed 2024b; Timiraos 2023) . The 
FHLBs disclose each district’s advances only at a quarterly cadence. 
However, some stigma also derives from the advantageous terms at which banks can borrow 
from the FHLBs relative to the Fed. The lack of transparency to the public about the terms of 
FHLB lending has likely shielded this driver of discount window reticence and stigma from 
broader public scrutiny; t he FHLB System is less transparent than the Fed about the 
economics of its lending. The Fed publishes its primary and secondary credit rates in real 
time, and also makes historical data on rates publicly available to download. By contrast, 
most FHLBs make rate data available only to member banks; only FHLB Des Moines and 
FHLB Pittsburgh provide historical time series on advance rates (with the latter’s data going 
back only to 2020) (FHLB n.d.; FHLB Pittsburgh n.d.a) . FHLB Boston allows the public to 
query advance rates for a specific historical date, and some FHLBs publish the current day’s 
advance rates (FHLB Boston n.d.) 
But the time series data that is published by FHLBs is on a gross basis and does not reflect 
the equity payouts that the FHLBs make to their borrowers. These dividend payments serve 
to reduce the borrower’s effective funding cost, frequently to a rate below that on equivalent-
maturity discount window loans. Although the Fed and other bank supervisors are 
increasing their efforts with banks to encourage discount window preparedness and usage, 
supervisory efforts cannot address the lower cost of FHLB advances. 
FHLB System Preferential Treatment 
The low cost of FHLB credit stems from the FHLBs’ preferential status in debt markets as 
government-sponsored enterprises. As the FHFA report notes, this status allows the FHLBs 
to issue  
89
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 8 ---
POLICY NOTE  
debt in the capital markets at rates only slightly higher than those on comparable 
Treasury instruments. This ability arises from the joint and several nature of 
consolidated obligations, as well as the perception that the federal government would 
provide support in the event of a default by the FHLBanks (FHFA 2023). 
This GSE status gives the FHLB significant advantages as an issuer of debt. It makes FHLB 
debt eligible for purchase by government money market mutual funds and provides for 
favorable treatment in banks’ capital and liquidity requirements. GSE status also makes 
FHLB debt eligible for purchase by the Federal Reserve in its monetary policy operations 
(Tarullo 2022). Indeed, in September 2008, when solvency issues at GSEs Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac led to market pressure on FHLB debt as well, the Fed announced its intent to 
purchase FHLB debt under its standard monetary policy authority, ultimately buying 
$14.5 billion (Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame 2008; FRBNY 2010; FRB 2008). The Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York reported that, as a result of this announcement, “discount note yields 
declined up to 60 basis points ahead of the first operation and spreads to comparable U.S. 
Treasury securities narrowed”5 (FRBNY 2009) .The FHLBs are also exempt from most taxes, 
and investors in their debt are exempt from state and local taxes on the interest income 
(Getter 2020). 
The FHLB System leverages its advantages as a debt issuer mainly to fund advances to 
members, but FHLBs also use the favorable access to debt markets to supplement their 
income (and enhance their dividends to borrowers) by funding a relatively stable-sized 
portfolio of long-term investment securities ($187 billion as of Q3 2023) and mortgage loans 
($60 billion) (FHLB 2024a). 
FHLB advance pricing faces few statutory constraints; FHFA regulation just requires that the 
FHLBs not price their advances below the marginal cost to the FHLB of raising matching 
funds, plus the administrative costs of the advance (FHFA 2010). The FHFA report notes, 
“Minimizing their debt issuance cost allows the FHLBs to pass benefits to members in the 
form of favorable advance pricing (relative to other funding sources) since the debt issuance 
cost is the core driver of advance pricing” (FHFA 2023). However, it does not note that this 
benefit accrues mainly to members that borrow from the FHLB System—nor does the report 
describe how this benefit is often effected through dividends paid disproportionately to 
those members. 
 
5 Sitting between the relatively low legal hurdles of the Fed’s “standard” monetary policy authorities—of 
Section 14 of the Federal Reserve Act—and the relatively high legal hurdles of the Section 13(3) emergency 
lending authority is the Fed’s Section 13(13) authority (Fed 1913). This authority allows the Fed to provide 
emergency loans against Treasuries and agency obligations—the latter of which the FHLBs issue by definition. 
This authority was used to provide standing credit lines to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in July 2008; it could, 
in theory, do the same for the FHLBs—which represents another government safety net feature bestowed by 
the GSE status (Fed 2008). 
See also the Fed’s study of alternative assets, inclusive of FHLB debt, for effecting monetary policy when the US 
was running budget surpluses (and thus running down th e supply of Treasury securities that are purchased 
and sold to implement policy): (Fed 2002) . 
90
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
POLICY NOTE  
FHLB Self-Capitalization Model 
Unlike the Fed, the FHLB System is exposed to default risk and, as a result, subject to capital 
requirements. The FHLBs are required by statute to maintain 4% capital to assets, in 
addition to other risk-adjusted ratios (US Government 2008b). While FHLB System members 
are required to hold nominal amounts of “membership stock,” the FHLBs mainly capitalize 
their lending activity through activity-based stock. This is a unique structure that allows the 
FHLBs to “self-capitalize” as activity grows (FHLB 2024b). 
How does “activity-based stock” work in practice? When an FHLB member borrows from an 
FHLB, they must invest a percentage of the loan in FHLB equity; this is called “activity-based” 
stock. The exact percentage varies slightly across FHLBs but typically amounts to 4% to 5% 
of the loan. While the borrower pays interest on the full amount of the loan, the amount 
invested is not simply lost liquidity; it receives a dividend like any equity investment.6 
FHLB Dividends Incentivize Borrowing 
The FHLBs’ dividend rates on activity-based stock consistently exceed the stated rate 
charged on advances—meaning borrowers effectively receive a discount to the stated 
advance rate. Since FHLBs primarily capitalize through activity-based stock—which is 
issued to those that take advances—the FHLBs pay the bulk of their dividends to those that 
borrow the most from the FHLB System. Moreover, several FHLBs also explicitly pay much 
higher dividends on activity-based stock than membership stock—further tilting the 
payouts toward members that are active borrowers. 
Indeed, a 2019 FHLB Des Moines presentation for members showed that while the 
membership stock dividend was simply in line with benchmark short-term interest rates, 
the activity-based stock dividend had historically received an additional 250 to 350 basis 
points (bps) (FHLB Des Moines 2019) . The presentation specifically stated that the activity 
stock dividend level was “a deliberate measure to pay shareholders for using [the FHLB 
System] cooperative” (FHLB Des Moines 2019) (see Figure 3). 
  
 
6 This equity investment receives a risk weight of 20% for regulatory capital purposes. This contrasts with a 
300% risk weight for publicly traded equities and 400% for nonpublic equity stakes (FDIC 2020). 
91
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 10 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Figure 3: FHLB Des Moines’s Stable Dividend History  
 
Note: Red markup is ours.  
Source: FHLB Des Moines 2019. 
Although public information about FHLB advances is relatively sparse, it’s clear that FHLB 
members are aware of the effect of FHLBs’ dividends on their total cost of borrowing. Some 
of the marketing of this benefit is in the public domain. For instance, a page on the FHLB 
Chicago website from 2019 shows how the dividend paid to activity-based stock (B1 in 
Figure 4) consistently exceeded the dividend paid to general membership capital (B2 in the 
figure) (FHLB Chicago 2019) . It also charts the size of the effective discount on the stated 
advance rate as a result of dividends over previous quarters; the discount hovered between 
7 and 14 bps.
 
  
92
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Figure 4: FHLB Chicago’s Dividend Rates and “All-In” Rates, Q2 2014–Q4 2019  
 
Source: FHLB Chicago 2019.
Another page shows the calculation for the third quarter of 2023, offering a 13-bp reduction 
to the stated advance rate (FHLB Chicago n.d.). Similarly, although FHLB Chicago—like most 
of the FHLBs—does not publicly provide historical advance rates, its homepage does provide 
a daily term sheet. In addition to effective advance rates, this sheet provides members the 
“all-in” rate they can expect to pay after adjusting for the expected dividend income (FHLB 
Chicago 2024). Figure 5 shows a snapshot from that sheet on December 20, 2023 (FHLB 
Chicago 2023). 
93
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 12 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Figure 5: Advanced Rates Snapshot, December 20, 2023 
 
Note: Red markup is ours.  
Source: FHLB Chicago 2023. 
As of the date of this term sheet, the Fed ’s discount window was charging 5.5% for loans of 
up to 90 days. Meanwhile, the FHLB was charging a headline rate of 5.49% for three-month 
loans, and the post -dividend rate shown led members to expect a further 13 bps refunded 
through dividends.7 
FHLB Pittsburgh similarly advertises the benefit of the dividend and provides a 
demonstration on its website of the refund ’s impact  for the FHLB’s members  (FHLB 
Pittsburgh n.d. a; FHLB Pittsburgh n.d. b). As of this writing, the example is for a one-year 
advance taken on October 23, 2023. It shows that while the stated rate on the advance was 
5.72%, expected dividends mean a member can expect to effectively pay 5.39% —a 33-bp 
discount (see Figure 6).  
 
7 While we note the three-month tenor because that’s what was currently on offer from the discount window 
(statute limits the discount window to a maximum tenor of four months), one can see in Figure 5 that the entire 
FHLB Chicago term structure was below the discount window rate—and even more so after accounting for the 
dividend refund. 
94
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Figure 6: FHLB Pittsburgh’s Dividend Impact Demonstration 
 
Source: FHLB Pittsburgh n.d.b.  
(Notably, however, the FHLB Pittsburgh calculation in Figure 6 divides the interest cost by 
the full advance amount of $1 million rather than the actual liquidity provided to the 
borrower, which would be $0.96 million. After that adjustment, the rebate is only 11 bps.) 
In a document on its webpage dated June 30, 2020, FHLB Atlanta illustrates a 21-bp discount 
on a one-year advance as a result of dividends paid to borrowers, as shown in Figure 7 (FHLB 
Atlanta 2020): 
95
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 14 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Figure 7: FHLB Atlanta’s One-Year Dividend Demonstration  
 
Source: FHLB Atlanta 2020. 
FHLB Des Moines provides members a dividend discount calculator, and a 2019 presentation 
for members demonstrates a 19-bp discount on a one-year advance (see Figure 8)  (FHLB 
Des Moines 2019; FHLB Des Moines n.d.). 
Figure 8: FHLB Des Moines Overview 
 
Source: FHLB Des Moines 2019. 
96
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
POLICY NOTE  
FHLB Dividends: A Market Incentive to Avoid the Discount 
Window 
While publicly available time series data from the FHLBs is limited, we can apply the type of 
calculation advertised by the FHLBs shown in the previous section to time series we obtained 
from the FHLB Des Moines and FHLB Pittsburgh websites. In Figure 9 , we plot the Fed’s 
primary credit rate, the stated FHLB Des Moines advance rate for a comparable maturity to 
the discount window, and the “all-in” FHLB advance rate that reflect the actual cost of 
borrowing after accounting for dividends paid to borrowers. (The precise calculation 
methodology is described in the Appendix.)  
FHLB Des Moines data, which is available from 2000, shows that the all-in cost of the FHLB 
advance has typically been markedly lower than the cost of primary credit (FHLB n.d.). The 
exceptions occurred when FHLB advances became more expensive than the Fed in the latter 
half of 2008 and throughout 2009, as well as in 2022 and 2023—before falling below the 
primary credit rate again recently (see Figure 9). 
Figure 9: FHLB Des Moines and the Discount Window, 2003–2023 
 
* Calculated to account for activity-based stock dividends. 
Sources: FHLB Des Moines; Federal Reserve; authors’ calculations.  
FHLBank Pittsburgh data, available only back through 2020, shows that while its stated 
advance rate has typically listed at a slight premium to the Fed’s primary credit rate, the all-
in borrowing cost was lower than the primary credit rate for most of 2020 and all of 2021. 
The all-in FHLB cost then moved to a notable premium throughout 2022 and 2023, before 
tightening again recently (see Figure 10). 
97
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 16 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Figure 10: FHLB Pittsburgh and the Discount Window, 2020–2023 
 
* Calculated to account for activity-based stock dividends. 
Sources: FHLB Pittsburgh; Federal Reserve; authors’ calculations. 
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Fed lowered the spread charged by the discount 
window over the upper bound of the federal funds rate (its monetary policy rate) to zero,8 
where it has remained. Despite this reduction in discount window pricing, which left the 
stated advance rates of both FHLB Des Moines and FHLB Pittsburgh higher than the Fed’s 
primary credit rate, the after-rebate cost at both FHLBs remained cheaper through 2020 and 
2021. Moreover, it is notable that both FHLBs then went from providing favorable rates to 
charging a premium throughout 2022 and 2023—just as demand for liquidity was picking 
up. A similar effect can be observed for FHLB Des Moines during the Global Financial Crisis 
of 2007–2009 (GFC; see Figure 11).9 
 
8 Before the GFC, the discount window charged a 100-bp premium to the fed funds rate; the Fed lowered this 
premium to 25 bps during the crisis. After the crisis, the Fed restored the premium to 50 bps above what was 
then the upper bound of the fed funds target range (a 25-bp range in which the Fed targeted the middle). This 
spread has been zero since being lowered on March 15, 2020. For background on these discount window 
adjustments, see Fed (2024a) and Fed (n.d.a).  
9 The FHLBs also manage their collateral policy procyclically, increasing their haircuts during episodes of 
volatility. By contrast, the Fed manages its collateral policy to avoid the need to raise discount window haircuts 
during episodes of market stress. 
98
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Figure 11: FHLB Advance Rate Spread over Primary Credit, 2003–2023 
 
Sources: FHLB Des Moines; FHLB Pittsburgh; Federal Reserve; authors’ calculations. 
This shift in FHLB lending posture should further underline to banks and regulators the 
advantages of having collateral pre-positioned at the Fed (McLaughlin 2024) . (At a 
minimum, establishing arrangements to readily move collateral from the FHLBs to the Fed 
and being operationally prepared to use the discount window would be directionally 
helpful—as the FHFA report notes .) If FHLB advance rates are consistently below the Fed’s 
primary credit rate—particularly during less volatile times, when banks are pre-positioning 
their collateral—the FHLB System may find it difficult to extract itself from playing a central 
role in banks’ contingency liquidity management, a role that the FHFA makes clear in its 
report is the Fed’s, not the FHLBs’. 
Reforming the FHLB Dividend Construct 
In thinking about the current way FHLB credit is priced and the adverse impact it appears to 
have on discount window stigma, two statements from the recent FHFA report demonstrate 
the FHFA’s clear desire to reconfigure the incentives of the FHLB System, particularly given 
its public mission: 
The FHLBanks receive certain advantages from their status as GSEs, and a greater 
portion of these benefits should be passed through to consumers and communities. 
FHFA supports the view that the unique advantages of the GSE status come with 
corresponding responsibilities for the FHLBanks to support their public mission. (FHFA 
2023) 
And: 
Congress has vested the FHLBanks with certain market advantages that enable  them to 
provide low-cost wholesale funding and other services to their members. Therefore, it 
99
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 18 ---
POLICY NOTE  
is reasonable to expect that the benefits of FHLBank membership should  accrue 
predominantly to institutions that demonstrate a meaningful commitment to supporting 
the housing and community development mission of the FHLBanks. (FHFA 2023) 
Although the FHFA Report does not specifically mention the borrower-favoring dividends or 
the effect thereof on banks’ contingency funding preferences, it does say the following: 
To encourage members to increase their support for the FHLBank mission, FHFA plans 
to undertake a rulemaking and issue related guidance, as appropriate, whereby each 
FHLBank would provide added benefits—such as discounted advance rates or 
differential dividends on capital stock—to members with a strong and demonstrable 
connection to the FHLBanks’ overall mission. (FHFA 2023) 
In evaluating any reforms to how the FHLBs lend, the advance rates and the dividend rate 
must be considered together, as the all-in cost of borrowing reflects both. As the United 
States General Accounting Office said in 2003:  
FHLBank officials said that there can be a connection between the advance interest rate 
that they charge and the dividend rate that they pay. That is, an FHLBank choosing to 
pay a relatively high dividend may need to charge a relatively high advance rate to earn 
sufficient profits to cover the costs associated with the dividend. In contrast, other 
FHLBanks may decide to provide value to their members through lowering their 
advance rates, which may mean a decrease in their dividend. (US GAO 2003) 
If FHLB credit remains structurally competitive with—and often cheaper than—the Fed’s 
primary credit, discount window stigma will remain. Thus, the starting place for 
implementing reforms desirable for both financial stability and FHFA mission alignment 
should be for the FHFA to promulgate FHLB regulations calling for the following: 
• FHLBs’ stated advance rates must be set at some minimum premium to the Fed’s 
primary credit rate; 
• Dividend payments and share classes shall distinguish between degrees of 
mission-consistent activity—that is, looking beyond simply borrowing from the 
FHLB System and to the nature of the borrowing member’s activity and its degree 
of alignment with advancing housing goals and community lending; and 
• The “all-in” cost of borrowing after accounting for dividends shall not fall below 
the primary credit rate except in cases of lending that is directly mission 
consistent. 
Now is the time to revisit the FHLBs’ dividend practices, both to better align FHLB lending 
with the System’s mission of funding housing and community development and to reduce 
the incentives for banks to prefer FHLB credit over the Fed as a contingent source of liquidity. 
Addressing both these goals could mean altering the FHLB rate structure and creating a new 
class of “activity stock” that would be held against lending that supports housing and 
community development—and paying FHLB dividends principally on that stock. 
100
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
POLICY NOTE  
References  
Armantier, Olivier, Helene Lee, and Asani Sarkar. 2015. “History of Discount Window 
Stigma.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/12020/ 
Ashcraft, Adam B., Morten L. Bech, and Scott Frame. 2008. “The Federal Home Loan Bank 
System: The Lender of Next-to-Last Resort?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 
No. 357. November 2008, 2008.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/6850/ 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2020. “Schedule RC-R - Part II. Risk-
Weighted Assets,” 2020.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4113/  
Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB). n.d. “ Advances - FHLB Des Moines.” Accessed May 15, 
2024. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4115/ 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta (FHLB Atlanta). 2020. “ Advantages of Advances: 
Compare FHLBank Atlanta Funding and Save.,” June 2020. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2629/ 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston (FHLB Boston). n.d. “Historical Rates.” Accessed June 5, 
2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4111 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago (FHLB Chicago). 2019. “How the FHLBank Chicago 
Dividend Reduces Your Borrowing Costs: Q3 2019,” 2019. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2621/ 
———. 2023. “Rate Indications.” Dataset, December 20, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2630/ 
———. 2024. “FHLBank Chicago Announces Q1 2024 Financial Highlights,” 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2619/ 
———. n.d. “Lower Your Borrowing Costs: The Dividend Effect.” Accessed January 5, 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2620/ 
Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines (FHLB Des Moines). 2019. “Regional Member 
Meeting,” May 9, 2019. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2622/ 
———. n.d. “Dividend Benefits.” Accessed June 5, 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2628/ 
101
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 20 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh (FHLB Pittsburgh). n.d.a. “ Advance Resources.” 
Accessed January 9, 2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2626/ 
———. n.d.b. “How Our Dividend Lowers Your Borrowing Costs.” 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2625/ 
Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). 2010. “Part 1265—Core Mission Activities. 12 CFR 
1265.2,” February 24, 2010.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4107 
———. 2023. “FHLBank System at 100: Focusing on the Future,” November 7, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2624/ 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY). 2009. “Domestic Open Market Operations 
During 2008,” January 2009.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/369 
———. 2010. “Domestic Open Market Operations During 2009.” Report for the Federal 
Open Market Committee Prepared by the Markets Group of the FRBNY, January 2010. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4104 
Federal Reserve Board (FRB). 2008. “Federal Reserve Board Announces Two Enhancements 
to Its Programs to Provide Liquidity to Markets.” Press release, September 19, 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/8280/ 
———. 2024a. “Discount Window Lending.” Web page.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4040 
———. n.d.a. “Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet.” Web page. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4101/  
Federal Reserve System (Fed). 1913. “Federal Reserve Act. Section 13: Powers of Federal 
Reserve Banks.” .  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4108 
———. 2002. “ Alternative Instruments for Open Market and Discount Window Operations.” 
Federal Reserve System Study Group, December 2002.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4099 
———. 2008. “Discount Window Lending -- Proposal to Lend to Fannie Mae and Freddie 
Mac through Advances Secured by Obligations of the United States or Any U.S. Agency,” July 
13, 2008.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4102 
102
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
POLICY NOTE  
———. 2021.  “Collateral Information.” Discount Window/Payment System Risk, December 
14, 2021.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4103 
———. 2024b. “Federal Reserve Balance Sheet: Factors Affecting Reserve Balances - H.4.1.” 
Press release, May 2, 2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4109 
———. n.d.b. “Term Auction Facility.” Accessed May 15, 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4114 
FHLB Office of Finance (FHLB). 2024a. “Investor Presentation: January 2024,” January 
2024. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2623 
———. 2024b. “Investor Presentation: May 2024,” June 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4112 
General Accounting Office (US GAO). 2003. “Federal Home Loan Bank System: Key Loan 
Pricing Terms Can Differ Significantly,” September 8, 2003. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4106 
Getter, Darryl E. 2020. “The Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) System and Selected Policy 
Issues.” Congressional Research Service, R46499, August 27, 2020. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/12933/ 
McLaughlin, Susan. 2024. “Note: Lessons for the Discount Window from the March 2023 
Bank Failures.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/3/ 
Tarullo, Daniel K. 2022. “Commentary: How to Limit the Risks to Financial Stability Posed 
by the Federal Home Loan Bank System.” Brookings Institution, July 11, 2022. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4100 
Timiraos, Nick. 2023. “Fed Data: Most Emergency Lending Was in the West.” Wall Street 
Journal, March 17, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4105 
US Government. 2008a. “‘ Advances to Members.’ Federal Home Loan Bank Act, 12 U.S. Code 
§ 1430, July 30, 2008.”  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/13120/ 
———. 2008b. “12 U.S. Code § 1426 - Capital Structure of Federal Home Loan Banks,” July 
30, 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4097 
  
103
FHLB Dividends: Low-Hanging Fruit Kelly et al.

--- Page 22 ---
POLICY NOTE  
Appendix: Methodology 
To provide a more accurate picture of the cost of borrowing from Federal Home Loan Banks 
(FHLBs), we have calculated an “all-in” cost measure, which accounts for the rebate from 
activity stock dividends paid to borrowers as part of the FHLB borrowing process. For 
purposes of calculating all-in rates on FHLB advances, we have broadly adopted the 
methodology in Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame (2008, app.), which captures (1) the cost of the 
advance rate plus (2) the cost of funding any haircut and the required capital stock purchase 
less (3) the capital stock dividend. We have made three methodological changes.  
First, we have assumed haircuts are nonbinding. This choice allows us to analyze the more 
“normal” positioning of these parallel borrowing mechanisms. To the extent FHLB haircuts 
were to bind before the discount window, FHLB advances would become more expensive—
unless market funding was cheaper than the FHLB, in which case the borrower would likely 
not be using an FHLB advance—or the borrower would likely be forced to (try to) move to 
the discount window.  
Second, to account for changes in discount window lending durations over time, where 
Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame  consistently uses a 30-day FHLB advance rate, we have used 
advance rates aimed at matching that of the discount window at that time (for example, if on 
a given date the discount window lent for a maximum of 90 days, we have used 90-day FHLB 
advance rates). Owing to an absence of data, when the discount window lent overnight, we 
have used one-week-duration FHLB advance rates, the shortest duration rates available for 
the entirety of our FHLB Des Moines dataset; for FHLB Pittsburgh, we have one-day duration 
data available.  
Third, similarly, where Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame use s the London Interbank Offered Rate  
as a proxy for th e cost of the capital stock purchase, we have used double -A-rated financial 
commercial paper of a duration matching that of the discount window (and therefore also 
the FHLB advance data) at that time (for example, if on a given date the discount window 
lent for a maximum of 90 days, we have used 90-day double-A financial commercial paper 
rates); we have used the 30-day measure for the brief period when the discount window’s 
maximum duration was 28 days. Where interest rate data was unavailable for a particular 
day, we have used the previous day’s data point. For Q4 2023 data, we have assumed the 
FHLB dividends will be the same as in the previous quarter.  As is the case with the FHLB -
provided calculation examples and Ashcraft, Bech, and Frame, we have made no adjustment 
for the precise timing of the quarterly dividend payment. All interest rate data is from the 
Federal Reserve. Data on advance rates and di vidends is from the applicable FHLBs. (For 
duration changes for the discount window, see Fed (2024a) and Fed (n.d.a). We have set the 
activity-based capital stock purchase requirement to 4.5% throughout for FHLB Des Moines, 
and 4.0% for Pittsburgh, consist ent with publicly available data and the FHLBs’ capital 
requirements. 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
104
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2