--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 4 
2024 
Lessons Learned: Calvin Mitchell III Lessons Learned: Calvin Mitchell III 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance and Financial 
Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, and 
Methods Commons, Public Administration Commons, and the Public Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2024) "Lessons Learned: Calvin Mitchell III," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 4, 
151-153. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1605 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss4/7 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss4/7

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Calvin Mitchell III 
By Mercedes Cardona  
Calvin Mitchell III served as executive vice president of the communications group within the 
executive office of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) during the Global Financial 
Crisis. In 2008, Mitchell was tapped by Timothy Geithner , who was then FRBNY president, to 
head a new group charged with expanding the communications and community affairs 
functions. Mitchell left the FRBNY in 2009 for the private sector and returned to government in 
2021 as assistant secretary for public affairs in the US Treasury Department . This Lesson 
Learned is based on an interview with Mitchell held on July 22, 2021; the full transcript can be 
accessed here. 
The communications team must have a seat at the table : It is an integral part of the 
crisis-fighting apparatus. 
Mitchell gives credit to Tim Geithner, first as president of the FRBNY and later as treasury 
secretary, for making communicat ions a priority  during the crisis  and emphasizing 
transparency. Geithner, said Mitchell, along with Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, 
and Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr., all understood that good communication was 
important, not just to the markets, but to the millions of American citizens invest ing in the 
markets directly or through their retirement funds.  
Mitchell was included in nearly all the FRBNY’s management team meetings to develop the 
agency’s response to the crisis. This helped him better understand the range of the FRBNY’s 
powers, granted by the Federal Reserve Act , in the context of a crisis . His presence at the 
table signaled to FRBNY colleagues that they should communicate and cooperate with his 
team. As a result, Mitchell said, he was able to work quickly to fashion a communications 
response and to update a communications plan, whatever was needed at the time. 
If there was any success around the communications at the Fed, I think it was due 
partially to the strong, trusted relationship I had with Tim Geithner. I was a part of 
most of his meetings, that he could trust me to be in those calls. There were times we 
could speak in shorthand about what was going to happen. I could just give him a little 
bit and he’d check and say “Yes.” And then I could come back with: “This is the plan.” 
It also helped for briefing him in order to speak with journalist s or a phone call with 
a columnist, or spend some time with some other person who was going to write an 
op-ed piece. Building that trust, not only with your colleagues around your institution, 
but building that ultimate trust relationship with your principal is really essential. 
Building relationships with your counterparts in other agencies before the crisis will 
facilitate the crisis-fighting effort.  
Leading the FRBNY’s communications group, Mitchell had a limited knowledge of the inner 
workings of Congress, but help from contacts within Treasury and the White House filled in 
151

--- Page 4 ---
the gaps . Forming those relationships should be part of the continuing work of the 
communications staff, Mitchell explained. He had long-standing relationships with the heads 
of communications at the Treasury Department , the Federal Reserve Board , and the other 
Federal Reserve Banks that served him well during the crisis. And as the crisis progressed,  
Mitchell established more interagency contacts, at the Securities and Exchange Commission, 
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and elsewhere.  
Those were years and years in the making, building those relationships, but they 
came in quite handy, building those relationships early with important stakeholders, 
as well as with media, was a very positive and successful aspect of our strategy. 
Understanding the timing of the market and what journalists needed fed into our 
discussions: “Well, I need to put something out before the markets in Japan opened, 
for journalists to understand what that meant, what we were going to say and what it 
meant.” People understood that intuitively, but they also had come to trust us in 
communications. Those kinds of relationships and that kind of sense of transparency 
was essential. And I think we did that well. 
A c risis presents an opportunity to  educate affected stakeholders about the 
government’s authorities and operations.  
As the crisis evolved, many publications added staff to back up their Fed and Treasury 
reporters. Often, they were business reporters who were used to covering banks or other 
financial beats, but they were not as versed in the Fed ’s responsibilities and authority. 
Setting up background, off-the-record briefings to explain some of the inner workings of the 
Fed and its actions was helpful, said Mitchell. The information delivered may not turn into a 
story, but it helps inform the coverage. 
Always assume that journalists know less than you think. They ’re not going to be 
insulted if you offer them a background br iefing on something. They ’re not going to 
be insulted if you propose an educational setting on another issue. They ’re going to 
appreciate it, and it may add to what they already know. It may correct some of the 
misunderstandings they have. And you’ve done them a service, made them be better 
journalists in some cases, where they’re not making assumptions based on something 
that they learned previously. It also builds a tighter relationship with the people that 
you’re dealing with, the journalists. Even today, I talk to people who express gratitude 
for the amount of extra briefings and background that we provided for them during 
the crisis, that that was something that people hadn ’t done before at my institution 
and maybe at other institutions. 
It is important  to clarify what each agency can and can ’t do to help, said Mitchell. Many 
agencies lacked the authority by law to act in certain ways during the crisis, or were limited 
to oversight of only one portion of the financial system. The Fed acted to help banks because 
that was what it was charged to do, but its efforts may have led some to form the impression 
that the government was helping Wall Street at the expense of individuals.  
152
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
There were a lot of people who even today don ’t know the rules and responsibilities 
of the Fed and what it can do. That became an issue for us later, as we began to deal 
with the aftermath of the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy and began to assist AIG: What 
rules, what authority did the Fed have? Because t his was [a] crisis in the financial 
system that impacted American citizens across vast ways, people saw what the Fed 
was doing as in a way helping institutions and not individuals. The Fed can ’t lend to 
individuals. You see all this work being done for ban ks and the financial system, but 
very little being done for individuals, [and] I think that adds to the frustration and 
maybe kind of lopsided coverage. People think: “Oh, the Fed is saving banks, but 
they’re not saving me. ” Or “They’re saving these millio naires, but they’re not saving 
me.” 
The best way around that is to relate the macroeconomic concepts to the local level, advised 
Mitchell. Showing how big ideas translate to the everyday lives of citizens  helps to make 
them understandable.  
Try to understand how to explain the story, not always at a 30,000-foot level, but how 
it impacts individual people. Every action by a bank is going to impact millions of 
homeowners, or it ’s going to impact credit card holders or those types of things. So 
not just understanding the policy and being able to speak about it at that high level, 
but what does it mean to pitch it to people ? What does it mean to the individual 
Americans living here? 
Dated: December 2024 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2021–27 
153
Lessons Learned: Calvin Mitchell III Cardona