--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 4 
2024 
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities 
Niccolò Cirillo 
Single Resolution Board 
Francesco Pennesi 
Single Resolution Board 
Sebastiano Laviola 
Single Resolution Board 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Bankruptcy Law Commons, and the Finance and 
Financial Management Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cirillo, Niccolò; Pennesi, Francesco; and Laviola, Sebastiano (2024) "The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons 
for EU Resolution Authorities," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 4, 1-54. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1599 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss4/1 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote 
The authors would like to thank Enrique Ezquerra, Giacomo Massa, Antonio Spissu, Jordan Thursby, 
Miguel Carcano Saenz de Cenzano (all SRB), and Ana Rita Garcia (former SRB) for their meaningful input 
and comments. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol6/iss4/1

--- Page 3 ---
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for  
EU Resolution Authorities 
Niccolò Cirillo,1 Francesco Pennesi,2 Sebastiano Laviola3, 4 
Abstract 
The March 2023 banking turmoil in the U nited States and Switzerland marked the most 
significant banking stress in financial markets since the 2007–2009 Global Financial 
Crisis, prompting a reevaluation of prudential and resolution frameworks. This paper 
explores whether the 2023 events offer preliminary le ssons for resolution authorities 
within the European Union (EU). 
Policymakers often struggle to restore confidence in financial systems and contain the 
repercussions of financial instability. While the 2023 crises in the US and Switzerland 
underscored this  difficulty, authorities largely managed to mitigate the most severe 
consequences. Nonetheless, some issues in bank crisis management were identified. This 
paper focuses on the EU crisis management framework, proposing potential regulatory 
changes to enhance its effectiveness in handling banking crises. Key areas of focus include 
(1) the interplay between deposit insurance and resolution, ( 2) the need for optionality 
and flexibility in resolution tools, and (3) the design of an effective public sector liquidity 
backstop. These elements are critical for improving the EU ’s capacity to manage future 
banking crises effectively. 
Keywords: bank regulation, bank resolution, financial stability, financial crisis, 
emergency liquidity assistance 
JEL Classifications: E58, G01, G28, K22 
  
 
1 Niccolò Cirillo, policy expert, Single Resolution Board, niccolo.cirillo@srb.europa.eu.  
2 Francesco Pennesi, policy expert, Single Resolution Board, francesco.pennesi@srb.europa.eu. 
3 Sebastiano Laviola, at the time of writing, board member of the Single Resolution Board responsible for 
Resolution Strategy and Cooperation, sebastiano.laviola@bancaditalia.it. 
4 This paper describes research being undertaken by the authors on certain technical aspects. It should not 
be reported as representing the views of the S ingle Resolution Board (SRB) . The views and opinions 
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the SRB. The 
SRB cannot be held liable for the content of this paper , and this paper does not represent a statement of 
official SRB policy, methodology , or position on matters addressed th erein, nor can this paper be 
understood as anticipating or preempting same. The authors would like to thank Enrique Ezquerra, 
Giacomo Massa, Antonio Spissu, Jordan Thursby, Miguel Carcano Saenz de Cenzano (all SRB) , and Ana Rita 
Garcia (former SRB) for their meaningful input and comments. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction 
The purpose of this paper is to explore whether the  2023 banking turmoil in the United 
States (US) and Switzerland can provide some preliminary lessons for resolution in the 
European Union  (EU). The events of March 2023  represented the most significant 
banking stress affecting financial markets since the 2007–2009 Global Financial Crisis 
(GFC). The turmoil unfolded in both the US, with the crisis of Silicon Valley Bank  (SVB) 
and other regional American banks, and Switzerland, with the demise of Credit Suisse—
a global systemically important bank ( G-SIB) characterized by a long-standing negative 
track record and negative economic results, putting in doubt the viability of its business 
model (see Figure 1)—which was subsequently merged with UBS. 
The 2023 banking turmoil has led to new reflections on the effectiveness of the post-GFC 
prudential and resolution frameworks. International regulators have therefore 
undertaken an assessment of the events, drawing initial lessons for potential reforms of 
banking regulation for supervision and resolution (on the reports of the Basel Committee 
on Ba nking Supervision [ BCBS] and the Financial Stability Board [ FSB] on the lessons 
learned for supervision and resolution, see Appendix).5 
The first element that emerges is that the ultimate cause of the recent bank failures on 
both sides of the Atlantic was bad governance, shortcomings in basic risk management 
practices and unsustainable business models, coupled in certain cases with weak 
application of the international standards. Higher capital and liquidity requirements 
cannot by themselves re store banks ’ ability to remain profitable when the business 
model is fundamentally flawed. 
The banks in crisis showed indeed : (a) common balance sheet fragilit ies, fueled by 
excessive risk-taking and inadequate risk management practices, ultimately threatening 
firms’ solvency; and ( b) exacerbated maturity mismatch  (for the US banks, long -term 
assets funded with short -term liabilities , in particular large amounts of uninsured 
deposits, plus large unrealized losses on securities held at amortized costs), amplified by 
digitalization and social network dynamics,  triggering deposit runs. As concerns the 
shortcomings in regulation and supervision , since 2018, the US regulation for medium-
sized banks  had been revi sed, exempting them fully or partially from certain 
requirements.6 
Greater effectiveness of supervision is needed to identify and challenge poor strategic 
decisions, governance and risk management leading to weak business models. In 
 
5 In particular, for the relevance of the banking turmoil for the architecture of (a) deposit insurance systems, 
see IADI (2023); ( b) supervision and going -concern prudential regulation frameworks, see BCBS (2023) ; 
and (c) for resolution frameworks, see FSB (2023a). Among the various academics and commentators, see 
Bair et al. (2023); Berner , Schoenholtz, and White (2023); Berner (2023); Tuckman (2023); and Bodellini 
and Colino (2023). In the institutional domain, see FSB (2023a); BCBS (2023); Barr (2023a); Coelho, Taneja, 
and Vrbaski  (2023); De Cos (2023); Enria (2023); FDIC (2023 f); FDIC (2023b); Fed (2023); Gruenberg 
(2023); and Expert Group on Banking Stability (2023). 
6 US midsize banks were partially or fully exempted from some prudential standards, such as the liquidity 
coverage ratio and net stable funding ratio. In addition, these banks were subject to stress tests with a lower 
frequency, could not reflect in their capital requirements the unrealized losses on securi ties held as 
“available for sale” on the balance sheet, and the preparation of resolution plans was not complete at the 
time of the crisis. 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
addition, authorities have to use all the tools at their disposal, including sanctions, to 
promptly enforce appropriate actions, and to have the appropriate quality and quantity 
of supervisory resources.7 
On prudential regulation, the Basel Committee will pursue targeted analytical work to 
assess whether specific features of the Basel Framework performed as intended during 
the turmoil—for example, the operationali zation and calibration of liquidity standards 
and the appropriate implementation of the interest rate risk provisions in the banking 
book, the treatment of held -to-maturity assets, and the role of additional Tier 1 ( AT1) 
instruments in the capital framework —and assess the need to explore policy options  
over the medium term. 
In terms of crisis management, the review of the FSB upholds the appropriateness and 
feasibility of the framework, identifying at the same time a number of implementation 
issues for global and other systemically important banks. Amon g the positive aspects, 
resolution planning and capabilities, as well as the build-up of sufficient loss absorbency 
capacity, proved useful and provided an executable alternative to the solution preferred 
by the authorities for Credit Suisse. In addition, cross-border cooperation and crisis 
communication within the core crisis management groups (CMGs) worked well and 
allowed for thorough contingency planning in the build-up of the crisis. 
Concerning the implementation issues, the most important are  (see Appendix for more 
detail): (a) communication and coordination of information among authorities, even 
beyond th e authorities involved in the CMGs ; (b) choice of resolution strategies and 
optionality of resolution tools; (c) consideration about the features of an effective public 
sector funding backstop; (d) implementation of the bail -in tool across national borders; 
(d) consideration of the resolution of banks that are not systemically important in life but 
could be come systemic in failure;  and (e) the interplay among bank runs, uninsured 
deposits, and the role of deposit insurance and resolution. 
The events of 2023 had limited repercussions on the EU banking sector, whose resilience 
can be explained by two factors. First, EU banks are characteri zed by a more broadly 
diversified business model when compared to the US regional banks involved in the 
crisis. Second, the EU has appli ed international regulatory standards —including the 
obligation to comply with liquidity and resolution requirements—to all banks, including 
small and medium -size entities (Enria 2023) . However, t he 2023 crisis provide d 
important elements to be further assessed also in the EU context, especially in the area of 
resolution, which is characterized by a more elaborated institutional framework. More 
specifically, this paper seeks to explore the changes that could be made in the regulation 
and in the implementation of the EU framework to improve its effectiveness in the 
management of a banking crisis. 
 
7 In the case of US banks, reports by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Federal Reserve System 
conclude that banks pursued risky business strategies compounded by weak liquidity and inadequate risk 
management (Tobias et al. 2023). Supervisors had indeed identified several vulnerabilities but were not 
quick enough to escalate supervisory actions, nor did they require banks to adopt a more prudent behavior 
when there was time. When an escalation was recommended, banks ignored it. In the case of Credit Suisse, 
already in 2019, an International Monetary Fund Financial Sector Assessment Program  (IMF SAP)  had 
asked to fill gaps in banking regulation and supervision (regulator understaffed), reduce reliance on 
external auditors, and remedy the lack of legal powers to restrict dividends (FSB 2024b). 
3
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 6 ---
After this introduction (Section I) and a short summary of the events of 2023 in Section 
II, among the implementation issues highlighted by the FSB report, we focus on the 
following three aspects:  complementarity of deposit guarantee schemes ( DGSs) and 
resolution frameworks to limit bank runs and manage more effectively a bank crisis , 
resolution strategies and optionality in resolution  tools, and the design of an effective 
public sector liquidity backstop in resolution. 
Section III , Bank Runs, the Role of Deposit Insurance and Resolution: One of the 
topics that emerged in the 2023 turmoil is the extremely accelerated run on deposits —
favored by connections of similar clients through digital platforms —and, particularly in 
the SVB case, the potentially destabilizing role played by large amounts of uninsured 
deposits. Given the relevance of deposits in bank business model s—that is, their 
contribution to the so-called bank franchise value—ensuring deposits stability is critical 
for safeguarding financial stability. 
An effective DGS should contribute to the  protection of finan cial stability by curbing 
depositors’ incentives to run.  Indeed, the literature has show n that insured depositors 
have less incentive to run with respect to uninsured ones. However, in the aftermath of 
the SVB case, institutional bodies, practitioners , and academics have started reflections 
on the different ways  to prevent bank runs and ensure  financial stability, including 
considerations, in the US, on the increase of the deposit insurance coverage for all or some 
categories of depositors (so-called targeted coverage). In this section, we first illustrate 
and assess these reform proposals—concerning both the liabilities and the assets side of 
the balance sheet—some of which present merits and deserve to be further scrutinized. 
Turning then to Europe, according to a recent European Banking Authority (EBA) report, 
96% of European Economic Area (EEA) depositors are DGS-protected. Given the low ratio 
of uncovered depositors, the EBA concludes that increasing the DGS coverage level would 
be very expensive, while bringing limited additional protection in terms of financial 
stability and consumer protection. Despite their low number (4%), uncovered depositors 
(mostly corporates) hold more than half of EEA deposits. Increasing coverage for them 
would not represent a fundamental change, as on average there would still be less than 
half of eligible deposi ts fully covered, even where the coverage level was to be EUR 1  
million. Consequently, risks of run behaviors would not be neutralized. 
Reflections at the international level on the lessons learned from the 2023 bank turmoil 
are on-going, including on the potential review of aspects of liquidity and interest rate 
risk provisions in relation to maturity mismatches, outflow rates of deposits, reliability 
of historical estimates for interest rate risk, and potential changes in customers’ behavior. 
As particularly concerns deposit risk and stability, a better understanding and closer 
monitoring of banks ’ deposit structure and maturities would be helpful. Concentration 
requirements in relation to uncovered deposits could also be considered. 
Additional considerations are related to the complementary role of deposit insurance and 
resolution to safeguard financial stability and prevent banks’ runs. The introduction of a 
minimum long-term debt requirement for banks of a certain size reduces incentives to 
run. For exam ple, in the EU , the resolution framework envisages, for banks with total 
assets higher than EUR 100 billion, a mandatory layer of subordinated liabilities, which 
shields uninsured depositors from loss absorption. In the case of SVB, the presence of this 
requirement could have created some disincentive for uninsured depositors to run 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 7 ---
(Gruenberg 2023) . Finally, depositor protection  and stability  may be enhanced  by 
envisaging a different and more active role for DGSs in the resolution process. Namely, by 
acting as a risk and loss minimizer in resolution, in specific cases, DGSs could fully protect 
depositors by withstanding the losses for the part of their claims exceeding the coverage 
level. A well-functioning DGS could indeed permit regulators to better achieve resolution 
objectives by financing the transfer of a bank to another marke t player in the resolution 
process, thus facilitating the market exit, a long-standing practice of the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in the US.8 In the European Union, however, the use of DGSs 
in resolution (and in alternative measures), outside the traditional “paybox” function, is 
constrained by the legal framework, particularly the “super priority” enjoyed by the DGSs 
in the creditors’ hierarchy. The Single Resolution Fund (SRF) can in turn intervene only 
if a specific share of liabilities has already been written down or converted. We consider 
that the crisis management and deposit insurance (CMDI) proposal of the European 
Commission (EC) would bring a  substantial improvement to the EU crisis management 
framework, facilitating the use of DGSs as financial bridges to reach the minimum bail-in 
requirement (8% of total liabilities and own funds) for accessing the SRF for failing banks, 
where needed (EC 2023a). 
In conclusion, effective resolution regimes can contribute to deposit stability in different 
ways: (a) mandating, for banks with a certain size (more than EUR 100 billion, in the EU), 
a minimum requirement of long-term subordinated debt expected to absorb losses in 
resolution; (b) strengthening market discipline (and decreas ing excessive risk-taking 
incentives); and, when resolution is eventually opened, (c) enabling a timely transfer of 
the deposit base to other players facilitating the market exit of the failing bank , strongly 
mitigating uncovered depositors’ incentives to run. 
Section IV, Optionality and Flexibility in the Choice of Resolution Tools: Another 
theme highlighted by the crisis is the opportunity to investigate the choice and feasibility 
of resolution strategies, including bail-in tools in various scenarios, for example liquidity 
crises. Other strategies, for example transfer tools, or a combination of strategies, could 
be more appropriate in certain situations. This implies the need to preserve optionality 
and flexibility in the use of resolution tools in crisis preparation, to cater for different 
failure scenarios. 
US, UK, and Swiss authorities all displayed flexibility in their resol ution approaches. In 
the United States, flexibility was employed to address the failure of three institutions, 
avoiding widespread contagion and preserving the stability of regional banks. As 
expected, shareholders and senior creditors were written down, avoiding moral hazard 
and promoting accountability. While the protection of unsecured depositors —through 
the systemic risk exception—increased resolution costs, the additional expenses will be 
recovered from the banking sector, in alignment with the general  resolution principle 
according to which banks should pay for their resolvability  (FDIC 2023). In the UK, the 
subsidiary of SVB was earmarked for liquidation because deemed to have no critical 
functions and no impact on financial stability in case of insol vency, but the Bank of 
England (BoE) changed its advice in the face of the potential disruptions that would have 
emerged in the fintech sector, and finally decided to sell SVB UK to a larger bank. 
 
8 A similar result would be obtained, for the banks not ear marked for resolution, with DGSs intervention 
with alternatives to piecemeal liquidation. 
5
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 8 ---
In Switzerland, the merger between Credit Suisse and UBS took place outside resolution. 
However, according to the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA) , the 
resolution framework offered a viable and alternative option to Swiss authorities. 
Although such option was not eventually pursued, the crisis management toolbox of 
Swiss authorities would have been poorer without resolution. Optionality therefore 
remains key to successful crisis  management, especially considering that the solution 
devised in this occasion —the merger between the two local G-SIBs—would not be 
available in the future (as there would be no local bank in Switzerland with the 
commercial interest and financial capacity to purchase the only remaining G -SIB) and 
consolidation with a foreign player was not considered; in addition, t he concentration 
among large and complex banks may make the too-big-to-fail (TBTF) problem more 
difficult to address. 
In the banking union, resolution planning for large banks has largely focused on the open 
bank bail-in (OBBI) approach. Since in most case s resolution authorities may have 
difficulties finding a purchaser for large and complex banks at short notice, the OBBI 
remains the most reliable tool for their resolution. However, there is also a need to further 
work on transfer tools, either in combination or as an alternative to the OBBI, according 
to the scenario and type of bank. We recommend flexibility and optionality in resolution 
approaches, following the example of other authorities both inside and outside the EU. 
Section V, The Role of Public Liquidity Backstop Mechanisms in Restoring Market 
Confidence during and after Resolution: As confirmed by recent events,  liquidity 
should be promptly made available to firms during and after resolution, in order to  
quickly restore confidence of market counterparties in the resolved bank. In the case of 
Credit Suisse, we witnessed the huge amount of funding put at disposal of the bank, which 
helped to restore market confidence and was fully reimbursed after a short time. At the 
international level  (FSB 2024 a), a reflection is ongoing on the design features (size, 
duration, collateral, etc.) of such mechanisms, and on the assessment of whether the lack 
of an adequate and explicit public liquidity backstop arrangement c ould be perceived as 
making resolution less credible. 
In this respect, different features of the public temporary liquidity backstop mechanisms 
in place in different jurisdictions contribute to ensure their credibility and 
effectiveness—that is, from an individual perspective, to meet and accommodate funding 
needs of viable firms facing temporary liquidity pressure and, from a system perspective, 
to ensure the stability of the wider financial sector. 
In the US and Swiss case s, the relevan t frameworks permitted authorities to tailor the 
features of the public liquidity backstop to the needs emerging in the turmoil . The 
Banking Union framework benefits from a Single Resolution Fund managed by the Single 
Resolution Board ( SRB) and a  common backstop provided by the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM) as soon as the ratification process of the latter will be finalized. There 
is, however, a shortcoming in tail scenarios, that is, liquidity needs arising from the failure 
of a large and complex bank, where the amount of funding needed could be similar to that 
employed for Credit Suisse. 
In this paper, we assess different contributions that have tried to address this issue at the 
Banking Union level, and we conclude that a public funding backstop—in the form of a 
guarantee—resting on the EU budget would represent a tru e and effective European 
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 9 ---
solution. In particular, the public guarantee could be provided by the European 
Commission—backed by the EU b udget. Alternatively, the public guarantee could be 
provided by the SRB, backed by either the issuance of long-term bonds or the promise to 
recoup any expense from the banking industry. An effective public and temporary 
liquidity backstop would align the Banking Union with the US and the UK regimes, and it 
would enhance the credibility and effectiveness of the EU resolution framework. 
The analysis of the topics highlighted above follows a similar structure throughout the 
paper. We illustrate the three topic s, first providing an overview of the main elements 
characterizing the subject under discussion as well as the main practical and theoretical 
issues emerged so far; then we introduce a European perspective. 
II. The 2023 Banking Turmoil: The Events 
In the US, the crisis of the so-called regional banks started with the failure of SVB, the 
16th-largest American bank in terms of total assets (USD 211 billion at the end of 2022).9 
Between 2019 and 2022, the bank experienced spectacular growth in uninsured deposits, 
which funded a nondiversified exposure to government securities , mainly “held-to-
maturity.”10 When the Federal Reserve  Board increased interest rates, the value of 
government bonds held by SVB  deteriorated and weaknesses developed in tech and the 
related industries it depended on, raising concerns on SVB’s capital position.11 
On March 8, the bank announced that: (a) it had sold USD 21 billion of securities, resulting 
in a USD 1.8 billion after-tax loss; (b) it was seeking to raise USD 2.25 billion in capital ; 
and (c) it was experiencing a higher rate of client “cash burn”—which, for SVB, meant 
deposit runoff—than expected. The next day, SVB experienced a bank run of historically 
unprecedented speed, facilitated by digital communication technologies and the strong 
commonalities among SVB depositors  (Cookson et al. 2023 ; Rose 2023 ; Krogstrup, 
Sangill, and von Sicard 2024). In a single day, SVB experienced more than USD 40 billion 
of deposit withdrawals, roughly 30% of its deposit base, and an additional USD 100 billion 
was expected to leave on March 10, had the California Department of Financial Protection 
and Innovation not closed the bank .12 The FDIC, appointed as receiver, established a 
vehicle called Deposit Insurance National Bank of Santa Clara (DINB), which would have 
 
9 SVB was largely active in California’s Silicon Valley region and mainly extended loans (and offered wealth 
management services) to the high-tech sector; at the same time, it raised funds from the very same industry, 
largely in the form of unsecured deposits. 
10 Meaning that, being accounted at amortized cost, any losses on these securities provoked by higher rates 
would be accounted for only at their sale. 
11 Under the  applicable US framework, the bank, given its size, was not required to meet liquidity 
requirements (in the form of a net stable funding ratio [NSFR] and/or, more importantly, a liquidity 
coverage ratio [LCR]). According to Feldberg (2023), the application of the LCR to SVB would have led to a 
LCR breach by end-2022 (in other words, the LCR would have amounted to 75%, 25% below the minimum). 
Both SVB and Signature Bank were not adequately prepared to tap the Federal Reserve’s discount window, 
lacking the capacity to promptly identify and use adequate collateral  (Barr 2023b; McLaughlin 2024). 
12 A similar run, encompassing roughly 30% of the deposit base, also affected on March 10 a n SVB 
subsidiary in the UK —which was in fact a rather small bank, with total assets amounting to roughly 12  
billion British pounds sterling (GBP). SVB UK, while predicated to fail under ordinary insolvency procedure, 
was eventually put into resolution and sold to HSBC by the Bank of England.  
7
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 10 ---
provided insured depositors with quick access to their funds (FDIC 2023a).13 Uninsured 
depositors, however, lost access to their accounts above the DGS coverage, obtaining only 
receivership certificates to recover their uninsured funds through the liquidat ion 
procedure.14 The treatment of uncovered deposits, and their exposition to potential 
losses, triggered a wider confidence crisis among other regional banks. Between Friday, 
March 10, and Saturday, March 11, another US lender, Signature Bank —which also 
presented a significant concentration of uninsured depositors —experienced a run that 
would not have permitted it to meet its obligations had it opened on Monday. 
The magnitude of the runs, coupled with the need to avoid the spreading of contagion to 
other regional banks, prompted the FDIC and the Federal Reserve to recommend to the 
secretary of the Treasury the adoption, on March 12, of a “systemic risk determination,” 
enabling the  extension of deposit insurance coverage to all depositors  of SVB and 
Signature Bank (US Treasury, Fed, and FDIC 2023). The FDIC changed its procedures from 
the setup of DINB to the establishment of two bridge banks, to which all deposits  
(including uninsured ones) were transferred . At the same time, the Fed used its 
emergency authority to create a special liquidity facility, the Bank Term Funding Program 
(BTFP), that was backed by a capital commitment from the US Treasury. The two 
temporary bridge bank entities were subsequently sold to competitors : First Citizens 
Bank bought parts of SVB, and New York Community Bancorp purchased parts of 
Signature Bank.15 Despite such efforts, a third US regional bank, the San Francisco–based 
First Republic Bank, which first came under pressure after the closure of SVB, ultimately 
fell victim of the contagion  several weeks later .16 The FDIC sold all the deposits and 
virtually all  the assets  of First Republic to JPMorgan  Chase, following a purchase and 
assumption (P&A) agreement, this time without using the systemic risk exception. 
During the same period, the Swiss G-SIB Credit Suisse suffered from an exacerbation of 
the shortcomings in its business model. Since the GFC, the bank was involved in a number 
of international scandals, which dented its reputation and credibility  (FINMA 2023b).17 
In October 2022, Credit Suisse came under strong liquidity pressures, with large outflows 
of assets and deposits , mostly from high -net-worth management clients outside 
Switzerland.18 Although the bank was able to withstand the pressure, the crisis left the 
institution in a precarious situation to face the 2023 banking turmoil. When the 
management delayed the publication of the bank’s 2022 annual report , and a key 
shareholder seemed to communicate that it would not provide further support, the bank 
 
13 The DINB was established on Friday, March 10, 2023, and insured depositors were expected to have full 
access to their deposits no later than Monday morning, March 13, 2023. 
14 To alleviate the loss of access to their accounts, the FDIC promised to pay uninsured depositors an 
advance dividend within the following week (FDIC 2023a). 
15 First Citizens Bank purchased about USD 72 billion in loans at a discount of USD 16.5 billion, as well as 
all deposits. Approximately USD 90 billion in SVB securities and other assets were not included in the deal 
and left behind in the FDIC receivership. New York Community Bancorp purchased USD 38 billion in assets, 
including USD 12.9 billion in loans, at a discount of USD 2.7 billion (Hirsch 2023). 
16 First Republic Bank funded its roughly USD 230 billion balance sheet with USD 104 billion deposits, of 
which 68% was uninsured. The bank was subject already in March to liquidity pressure, which prompted 
11 US banks to offer USD 30 billion in deposits, in an effort to curb the panic. 
17 Recurrent scandals and mismanagement cases—the Mozambique case, the surveillance affair, as well as 
the Greensill and Archegos cases —eroded the bank ’s reputation ; dented its profitability ; and led to 
customers, investors, and public authorities alike losing trust in the entity. 
18 The total deposit outflow in Q4 2022 was equal to 138 billion Swiss francs (CHF). 
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 11 ---
was again subject to a run, this time involving not only wealthy clients but all depositors 
(FINMA 2023b). 
On March 15, Switzerland’s central bank, the Swiss National Bank (SNB), attempted to 
calm the market by extending to the bank a 50 billion Swiss franc (CHF) line of emergency 
liquidity assistance (ELA)19. On March 19, Credit Suisse was merged with UBS outside the 
ex ante procedures laid out in Switzerland for the resolution of a failing bank . The Swiss 
authorities facilitated the deal by : (a) granting UBS a second loss guarantee 20 and ( b) 
extending two new central bank liquidity lines, jointly amounting to CHF 200 billion. The 
merger deal was based on  an exchange ratio  of one UBS share for every 22.48 Credit 
Suisse shares held , as well as  the full wipe -out of CHF 16  billion of AT1 instruments 
(FINMA 2023b). 
The set of measures adopted by US and Swiss authorities safeguarded financial stability, 
avoiding financial contagion. The events nevertheless led to reflections, still ongoing, on 
the need to improve certain procedural and operational elements of the resolution and 
supervisory frameworks in both jurisdictions , to strengthen their effectiveness and 
reliability (see Appendix). 
Figure 1: Credit Suisse—Market Indicators 
 
Source: Reproduced from Expert Group on Banking Stability (2023).  
 
19 At the same time, FINMA and the SNB stated that US banking issues d id not directly threaten Swiss 
financial markets, citing stringent Swiss capital and liquidity requirements. Along these lines, it was 
affirmed that Credit Suisse complied with standards for systemically important banks (FINMA and SNB 
2023). 
20 Under this guarantee amounting to up to CHF 9 billion, the government would bear losses only after UBS 
would have borne a first loss of CHF 5 billion. 
9
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 12 ---
III. Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Resolution 
III.1 Preserving Banks’ Franchise Value and Ensuring the Stability of the Deposit 
Base in Crisis: The Role of DGSs 
The 2023 banking turmoil  has acted as a reminder on the  potentially destabilizing role 
played by uninsured deposits in modern banking systems. In the case of SVB, the peculiar 
liability structure of its balance  sheet—a funding structure heavily reliant on a 
concentrated base of uninsured depositors ’ not facing significant transaction costs in 
coordinating their behaviors —coupled with the characteristics of its business model  
offer a good account of the causes of the turmoil. Put differently, deposit stability is critical 
for safeguarding financial stability. 
This is owing to the function deposits play in the traditional banking business model  
(Restoy 2023) . Deposits are indeed not only relevant for the funding of the bank ing 
business—and considered, under this light, in their source of funding role—but for most 
banks, deposits are themselves the business, in the sense that taking deposits from 
retailers and corporations, which represent clients of the bank, constitutes and 
contributes to the franchise value of the bank.21 
From a bank’s balance sheet perspective, the importance (and the value) of the deposit 
franchise, which is in fact a direct consequence of the bank’s maturity transformation 
function through deposit-taking, lies in that: the capability to finance part of its assets 
through a source of funding that is usually unsensible to, and remunerated at rates lower 
than, market interest rates provides the bank with a natural hedge to interest rate risks 
emerging on its balance sheet (Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl  2021). Yet, such natural 
hedge may fail to fulfil its function exactly when it is most needed, as the SVB case has 
shown—that is, the deposit franchise may be runnable (Drechsler et al. 2024). 
For all the above  elements to be preserved—that is, for safeguarding financial stability; 
for the deposit franchise value to be maintained and, as a consequence, for the deposit 
hedge to work —deposits must remain in the bank. This result is primarily achie ved by 
 
21 Along this line, it has been said (Armour et al. 2016):  
For a bank, unlike a non -financial firm, the composition of the balance-sheet is essential to its value. 
The business of a bank is not just about screening and monitoring when extending credit to firms and 
households but also about extending liquidity services to depositors in the form of claims that are 
sum certain and continuously redeemable. One might go so far as to say that the business of a bank is 
financing medium- and long- term credit claims with deposits. This means that an all-equity bank will 
be a less valuable bank than one funded at least in part by de posits. The idea of the ‘irrelevancy’ of 
financing to business project value does not hold where the business project itself is a particular form 
of financing.  
See also Davies (2015). 
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 13 ---
DGSs, which have historically represented the first and most direct tool to avoid bank 
runs22 and protect insured depositors.23 
DGSs act as stabilizers both at micro  and macro level s. At the micro level, DGSs protect 
the accounts of single depositors—chiefly retailers  and households—by reimbursing 
them, should the bank be declared failed and in liquidation. Yet, to avoid the creation of 
moral hazard incentives, this protection is anchored to clearly defined limited coverage 
levels (IADI 2014, princ. 8). At the macro level, DGSs contribute to financial stability by 
modifying ex ante covered depositors’ incentives to run. 
In the case of the 2023 turmoil, however,  the safety net provided by the FDIC ’s Deposit 
Insurance Fund (DIF) did not prevent the liquidity outflows stemming from US regional 
banks.24 This can be explained with the large holdings of uninsured deposits that 
characterized such  institutions—it is worth emphasi zing that uninsured deposits 
represented 89% of the total deposit base of Signature Bank and about 94% of SVB 
(Restoy 2023) . Although such banks were outliers in terms of deposit composition, 
displaying an abnormal concentration of uninsured depositors not facing significant 
transaction costs in coordinating their behaviors, their crisis has nevertheless triggered 
an intense policy discussion on the future of deposit protection. The question is whether 
one of the crucial characteristics of DGS nowadays, namely the limited protection 
provided to depositors by a predefined coverage level, should be revisited—and bearing 
 
22 Economic literature on bank -run phenomena is hefty. From a taxonomy p erspective, there are at least 
two different models trying to explain the phenomenon, and namely:  
(a) Under a first model (so -called panic -based model), bank -run phenomena are not correlated to 
fundamentals, for instance, the deterioration of the bank ’s fi nancial position or changes in the 
economic cycle. Under this model, depositors withdraw their deposits for reasons exogenous to the 
model itself. The spread of the panic among depositors, who anticipate that other depositors may 
start withdrawing their de posits, triggers the run —in a classic example of a self -fulfilling prophecy 
(Diamond and Dybvig 1983). 
(b) Under a second model (so-called fundamental-based model), depositors’ behavior is conditioned 
to economic cycle outcomes. So, under this model , run phenomena represent answers to investors ’ 
expectations about future spread of fundamental shocks to the financial sector  (Gorton 1988). 
23 Liquidity risks are not only tackled through effective deposit guarantee schemes—which though address 
these risks only to the extent that they originate from the behaviors of depositors, and which are also 
“preventive” in nature, in the sense that they try to tame liquidity outflow from arising in the first place. 
Prudential liquidity and funding requirements aim at keeping the business in going -concern—or at least, 
to keep it in going -concern as long as possible, ahead of possible supervisory interventions —when 
eventually liquidity stress happen s. They operate both by mandating the ban k to (a) maintain a stock of 
high-quality liquid assets (HQLA), which could be easily sold on the market once creditors ’ claims fall due 
and are not rolled over, to cover cumulated net liquidity outflows over a 30-day period (so-called LCR); and 
(b) base its funding structure on a certain amount of stable source of funding (so -called NSFR). 
The calibration of these two standards, which have been called into question in the context of the 2023 
banking turmoil, is not the object of analysis in this paper. For their features, characteristics, and objectives, 
see BCBS (201 3) and BCBS (2014). For some reflections on their calibration after the recent banking 
turmoil, see BCBS (2023). 
24 With a funding structure heavily reliant on a limited and concentrated number of uncovered deposits (at 
year-end 2022, 94% of SVB ’s domestic deposit base was above t he coverage threshold) and a single -day 
deposit outflow amounting to USD 42 billion (roughly the 24% institution ’s deposit base) , it couldn’t be 
realistically expected that the USD 250,000 coverage provided by the FDIC would have modified the 
incentive of such depositors to run. 
11
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 14 ---
in mind, at the same time, that any increase of the protection provided to depositors could 
also incentivize moral hazard behaviors, thus undercutting overall market discipline.25 
Institutions, academics , and practitioners have recently addressed the topic of the 
adequate coverage by DGS s, proposing a number of reforms. We list them below, 
mentioning for each option pros and cons. 
• Unlimited coverage of all deposit contracts  (Cecchetti, Philippon, et al. 2023; FDIC 
2023c; Heider et al. 2023) : This is arguably a radical option that would have the 
effect of removing altogether every incentive on depositors to run —and thus it 
would contribute to the greatest degree to financial stability. Yet, it would also be 
extremely expensive, as the unlimited coverage would be  footed by the banking 
industry through increased contributions to the DGS . Furthermore, the 
redistributive effects of such proposal should be carefully considered, as it would 
imply a redistribution of resources from competitive banks to their weaker peers, 
as well as  of cost  from the banking industry to consumers —given that at least 
some of the additional costs would trickle down to banks’ clients (Restoy 2023). 
Finally, it would also contribute to moral hazard dynamics. 
• Targeted coverage of certain categories of deposits —in particular, transactional 
accounts used for payroll purposes  (FDIC 2023 c; G -30 2024) : Here, we need to 
distinguish between so -called transaction accounts , held at a bank —usually by 
small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) —for payroll and transactions 
functions, and deposits held for investment purposes.26 Only the former category 
would obtain additional coverage, given such accounts’ essential role for modern 
market economies, in light of their role as means of payment. The most important 
drawback of this proposal is represented by the difficulty to establish effective 
criteria to distinguish between “investment” and “operational” deposits, to avoid 
arbitrage behavior.27 Also, the targeted coverage would still need to be anchored 
to a specific threshold, considering that it should not amount to an unlimited 
coverage.28 
 
25 Such a remark is common and widespread  (FDIC 2023 c; IADI 2014; Perotti 2023 ; Restoy 2023). The 
argument holds that the bank’s constituencies could be incentivized to take on higher risks than those they 
would take in a world without a deposit safety net, as a DGS would by definition remove any incentives for 
depositors to monitor bank activities and accordingly tailor the remuneration they demand to the bank ’s 
risk profile. In reality, evidence is rather mixed on this point, that is, there is both evidence that deposit 
insurance can increase bank risk -taking and evidence that it does not. For a brief analysis in this respect, 
with relevant literature review, see FDIC (2023f), in particular footnote 99 of the FDIC document. 
26 The focus on SMEs only, and not on larger firms, is justified by the fact that usually the latter, unlike the 
former, are better positioned and equipped to manage their cash resources (Cecchetti, Philippon, et al. 
2023). 
27 In this regard, there are some presumptive features that could be emphasized—for instance, the fact that 
the depositor has contractually agreed not to receive any interest payment on the sum deposited. Yet, while 
a non-interest-bearing account would signal the “non-investment” nature of the claim, it would fall short of 
representing an “operational” trait (G-30 2024) . Another presumptive trait that could be emphasized 
pertains to the fact that investment and saving accounts usually impose a penalty for early termination. On 
the challenges posed by arbitrage behaviors, see Cecchetti, Philippon, et al. (2023). 
28 See FDIC (2023f), whereby, though no proposal is made, it is remarked how “a deposit insurance limit of 
USD 2.5 million for accounts [. . . ] would likely cover payr oll for a large proportion of small and medium -
 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 15 ---
• Adjusted insurance limits in an incentive -aligned manner (G-30 2024): Under this 
proposal, the coverage limit would represent a function of the bank’s risk profile—
that is, banks presenting less risky business models, and thus a reduced risk of 
failure, would enjoy higher coverage for their deposits. The assessment should be 
based on  quality and quantity –related indicators  (for instance, stability of the 
funding sources) capable of curbing banks ’ incentives to undertake risky 
activities. This option would however disrupt the equality principle between 
deposits, as depositors in certain banks would be more protected than others. 
• Implementation of “minimum balance at risk” provisions for uninsured depositors  
(Cipriani et al. 2023) :29 Such a proposal is built on the need to create a trade -off 
between uninsured depositors’ immediate access to the liquidity of their claims—
through immediate withdrawal—and the risk of loss exposure of their deposit ’s 
principal amount, which in turn should reduce run incentives . Namely, the 
minimum balance at risk approach would work as follows: Uninsured depositors 
would be granted ordinary and unlimited access to their sight deposits up to a 
certain amount of the claims ’ par value —say, up to the 95% of their nominal 
amount. Access to the remaining amount would  be delayed for a given period , 
during which this not-withdrawn part would be subordinated to claims of those 
(uninsured) depositors who did not withdraw in excess of the limit (the so-called 
minimum balance at risk). Thus, former depositors would potentia lly absorb 
losses with priority to the latter, should the bank fail. Such a mechanism would in 
theory provide depositors with an incentive not to run entirely on their banks, 
should they want to avoid the risk of losses being allocated on their “minimum 
balance” principal amount. This option appears radical if only one considers how 
the “money-like nature” of deposits, namely their convertibility at face value in an 
equivalent means of payment , is here put into question.  It would also constitute 
an expensiv e option, as uncovered depositors would likely demand higher 
compensations to the bank for the increased risk they would face—moreover, the 
charges should be extremely high to effectively tame run incentives.  Finally, 
implementing such an option would require the relevant insolvency cascade to be 
amended, given the fact that certain claims would see their ranking being 
modified—albeit only temporarily during a crisis. Setting aside the complexity this 
would entail, from a resolution angle , this ranking modi fication may also raise 
certain par condicio creditorum issues, given that similar claims would be treated 
differently. 
The proposals analyzed above all aim at taming run incentives by focusing on the liability 
side of the bank’s balance sheet: an effective DGS, by means of an adequate coverage level, 
should guarantee or improve the stability of deposits—which in turn positively 
 
size business payment accounts .” In Japan, by contrast, full coverage for certain payment accounts is 
already in place (FSB 2023a). 
29 The proposal, at least in its intended goal, somehow recalls the limited convertibility rule applying to US 
money market funds (the 2014 S ecurities and Exchange Commission Rule 2a-7) under which the fund ’s 
board may impose a liquidity fee of up to 2% (so-called swing pricing) or temporarily suspend redemptions 
(so-called gating), should (a) the fund ’s weekly liquid assets fall below 30% of its total assets and (b) the 
fund’s board determines that imposing a fee or a suspension is in the fund ’s best interests (Perotti 2023). 
The major cons of rules of these kinds lie in their poten tially self-fulfilling nature, that is, the anticipation 
of a liquidity fee or a suspension among depositors may incentivize the latter to preemptively withdraw.  
13
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 16 ---
contribute to the bank ’s f ranchise value. Another proposal pursues the same goal of 
safeguarding financial stability and curbing run incentives on depositors , but it is 
centered on the assets  side of the balance  sheet. In particular, in the US , the following 
proposal has been formulated: 
• Unlimited and uninterrupted access to central bank liquidity by means of asset pre-
positioning (G-30 2024; Hsu 2024):30 Under this proposal, the central bank would 
guarantee to credit institutions an unlimited and uninterrupted access to a credit 
line—which thus should tame, if not avoid, the outburst of run behaviors —
conditioned on the latter’s holding a sufficient combination of money, central bank 
reserves, and pre -positioned high-quality collateral with the central bank . 
Collateral pre-positioning would amount to a requirement placed upon the bank, 
which would be entitled to issue short-run liabilities only up to the liquidity value 
of such collateral. In particular, banks would be required to pre -position enough 
collateral at the central bank to meet all or part of their “runnable obligations.” 
Runnable obligations includ e all liabilities, except for capital, subordinated debt, 
long-term senior debt, and other claims with (remaining) maturities of more than 
one year. The proposal  would not include fully insured deposits , since “insured 
deposits are unlikely to run in the f irst place if deposit insurance works 
effectively” (G-30 2024, 10).31 The implementation of an option of this sort would 
remove altogether any incentive to run in the midst of a crisis as depositors’ claims 
would be honored thanks to the liquidity obtained by the central bank—provided 
though that proper communication to these parties took place. A substantially 
more extreme version of that proposal would require banks ’ reserves and pre -
positioned collateral to cover insured deposits as well. In such a case, there may 
be no longer a need to have in place an effective DGS. 
Yet, different concerns have been raised with regards to this proposal  (Cecchetti, 
Philippon, et al. 2023).  First, the central bank ’s role in setting collateral haircuts  may 
potentially interfer e in the allocation of credit .32 Second, a pre -positioning obligation 
would in practice “lock away” an expanding number of banks ’ unencumbered assets, 
preventing their use in private funding markets —and, in a sort of a feedback loop, the 
more these assets are pre -positioned at the central bank, the less of an active market 
providing price signals for valuation and haircut purposes there will be (Kaminska 2024). 
Yet, one could rebut that such a scenario is not likely to arise if banks pre-position assets 
they will never use for private funding—such as credit claims. In any case, on the back of 
 
30 More “extreme” versions of these proposals  have been suggested , whereby liquidity from the central 
bank would also cover insured deposits and effectively act as a “pawnbroker for all seasons ” (Cecchetti, 
Philippon, et al. 2023; King 2016). 
31 Capital, subordinated  debt, and long -term senior debt are not considered “runnable liabilities ,” given 
their remaining maturity does not “represent liquidity risks that need to (or should) be addressed by LoLR” 
(G-30 2024 , 10 ). In the proposal advanced by Hsu (2024), the new targeted regulatory requirement is 
centered on the liquidity value of collateral pre-positioned at the discount window in addition to reserves 
(that is, the numerator of the ratio) against ultra-short-term liquidity outflows (that is, the denominator of 
the ratio). 
32 It has been argued that “these haircuts would be calibrated for stress times but would also apply during 
normal times. Setting haircuts too steep would distort economic and credit outcomes in the economy, while 
not being conservative with haircuts may expose the central bank to counterparty losses. Striking the right 
balance would be a challenge ” (Acharya et al. 2024 , 135 ). More generally, on how the central bank ’s 
collateral framework can have distortionary effects on financial markets, see Nyborg (2017). 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 17 ---
the crisis at SVB—which was not operationally ready to access the discount window—in 
the US, the authorities have made clear that depository institutions should practice their 
ability to use the discount window in case of emergency, throu gh stress tests and 
simulations; at the same time,  proposals have also been made on how to reduce the 
stigma associated with use of the discount window (Barr 2023b; Hsu 2024). 
III.2 Preserving Banks’ Franchise Value and Ensuring the Stability of the Deposit 
Base in Crisis: The Role of Resolution 
As also shown by the SVB crisis, DGSs are not sufficient by themselves to ensure deposit 
stability. Consequently, in addition to market discipline, policymakers have established 
other public safeguards, such as prudential regulation—imposing solvency and liquidity 
requirements, supervision, and, for what especially concerns us in this paper, resolution 
regimes. In this section, we focus on how resolution can contribute to deposit stability , 
ultimately the main macro objective of DGSs, as this occurs through a variety of channels. 
First, an important contribution to deposit stability is provided by  the main resolution 
requirement, namely the obligation of banks to maintain a minimum amount of total loss-
absorbing capacity (TLAC) in the form of long-term subordinated debt, which is expected 
to absorb losses in resolution  (FSB 2015) . In other words, the presence of TLAC 
constitutes an additional layer of security for uncovered depositors, curbing their 
incentives to run, as there is a cushion of non-runnable liabilities expected to face losses 
before them and that can contribute to the recapitalization of the failing entity  (Ringe 
2017). This is an element that has been widely raised in the context of the SVB failure, as 
the bank was  not mandated to meet such a requirement under the US framework  
(Cecchetti, Schenholtz, et al. 2023; Dewatripont, Praet, and Sapir 2023; Gruenberg 2023; 
Restoy 2023). In particular , the obligation to maintain such a layer of debt could have 
restrained uninsured depositors from running (or at least, in the form and at the speed 
the run took place in SVB), if SVB had sufficient capital and TLAC to absorb its losses. 
From the FDIC’s point of view, a TLAC layer could have significantly reduced th e cost to 
the Deposit Insurance Fund  of bailing out uninsured depositors . The recent FDIC 
proposal to require large banks with total assets of USD 100 billion or more to maintain 
a layer of long -term debt must be read along this line (FDIC 2023b). In the EU, there is 
already in place a subordination requirement for banks with total assets exceeding EUR 
100 billion, consolidated at the level of the resolution group (so-called top-tier banks)—
and this besides the specific requirements for G-SIBs. 
Second, an effective resolution framework strengthens market discipline,  which 
decreases moral hazard and represents a safeguard against excessive risk-taking. On the 
one hand, banks’ management cannot count on a public bailout to escape accountability, 
and on th e other hand, subordinated debtholders —exposed to the bail -in risk —are 
expected to effectively monitor the bank ’s activities. In the EU, empirical analysis shows 
that minimum requirements for  own funds and  eligible liabilities ( MREL) debtholders 
tend to monitor banks , while the adoption of the resolution framework has reduced 
bailout expectations (Cutura 2021).33 
 
33 Some commentators have  however criticized the capacity of MREL debtholders to exert market 
discipline, arguing that the complexity of the resolution framework would prevent debtholders from 
exercising their monitoring role (Martino 2020). 
15
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 18 ---
Third, and most importantly, a successful resolution regime can further contribute to the 
overall stability of the deposit base by  allowing the orderly exit of failing banks , in a 
procedure that preserves the franchise value of the failing institution , which in turn 
increases deposito rs’ confidence in the banking system.  For example,  resolution 
authorities can quickly recapitalize a bank through the bail-in when problems become 
pressing, regaining the confidence of depositors before run risks materialize.34 However, 
the most powerful resolution tool to protect the franchise value is arguably represented 
by the sale of business , that is the possibility that the resolution authority will sell the 
entire deposit base (including uncovered deposits) of the failing bank to a competitor. 
For example, the FDIC in the US has a long tradition of transferring all deposits (including 
uncovered) if this meets the least-cost test, namely if the financial contributions provided 
by the DIF to the transfer are less expensive than a deposit -by-deposit payout in 
liquidation. In exceptional cases , in order to safeguard financial stability and avoid 
contagion, even if the transfer of uncovered deposits fails to meet the least -cost test, US 
authorities can still transfer the entire deposit base  using the so -called systemic risk  
exception (Labont 2023).35 As a result, uncovered deposits have rarely suffered losses in 
the US; since 1992 , only 20% of the failures involved losses for noncovered depositors, 
with an average loss of 28% (FDIC 2023d). Although it could be argued that the treatment 
of uncovered depositors in US has a bailout component, it is undeniable that it has 
positive effects for deposit stability (Beck, Iannidou, et al. 2024).36 A timely transfer of 
the entire deposit base preserves the franchise value of the failing bank, avoids piecemeal 
liquidation, and curbs the run incentives of both covered and uncovered depositors. For 
example, the 2023 decision of US authorities to activate the systemic risk exception  for 
SVB and Signature Bank  stopped the panic among uncovered depositors in regional 
banks, which were prone to move their accounts to larger institutions, especially G-SIBs, 
which were deemed to be safer. 
In conclusion, the resolution framework and the DGSs reinforce each other in their 
mutual objective of preserving deposit and financial stability. The resolution framework 
preserves business continuity and critical function s, avoiding the piecemeal liquidation 
and loss of franchise value of the bank at the point of exit. In turn, DGSs contribute to the 
stickiness of covered deposits, while also providing funding in resolution  under certain 
conditions (compliance with the “least-cost test”). 
 
34 For example, EU resolution authorities can apply the write-down and conversion (WDC) of capital 
instruments outside resolution to preventatively recapitalize the bank. However, the bail-in tool can act as 
stabilizer only if resolution authorities act pro -actively, addressing not only the capital shortages of the 
bank through the bail-in but also the root causes of the crisis (mismanagement, failing business model, etc.). 
This will likely require the use of other measures in combination with the bail -in (for example, the 
replacement of the bank’s management). 
35 The systemic risk exception allows authorities to forego the least-cost test to address systemic risks. It is 
determined by the Treasury secretary, in consultation with the US president, upon the written 
recommendation of at least two -thirds of the FDIC ’s and the Fed’s boards. Any loss incurred by the DIF 
must be repaid by the banking sector through special fees  or assessments. The exception has been  
determined only seven times, five during the GFC and two in 2023. 
36 Although it has been argued that in the US there would be a de facto 100% deposit insurance coverage, a 
recent analysis suggests that insured and uninsu red deposits are still treated differently by depositors, 
implying that the current US framework—where the protection of uncovered deposits is provided only on 
a case-by-case, exceptional basis—still exerts some market discipline (Beck, Iannidou, et al. 2024). 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 19 ---
III.3 Preserving Banks’ Franchise Value and Ensuring the Stability of the Deposit 
base in crisis: The European Framework 
In the European Union, deposit insurance is provided at the national level, a ccording to 
the provisions of the DGS Directive  (DGSD), which ensure s a certain lev el of 
harmonization.37 To understand the effectiveness of national DGSs to preserve deposit 
stability during a crisis, the first element to consider is the adequacy of the current 
coverage level. In accordance with Article 6 of the DGSD, member states must “ensure 
that the coverage level for the aggregate deposits of each depositor is EUR 100,000 .”38 
The coverage level in the EU is therefore lower than  in the US, where deposits are 
currently covered up to USD 250,000.39 
A recent report by the European Banking Authority offers a preliminary analysis of the 
adequacy of the EU coverage level (EBA 2023). In particular, the European Commission 
asked the EBA to provide an  analysis, among others,  of the current deposit coverage 
level—also in light of the events that took place in the United States and in Switzerland—
considering scenarios (and the associated costs and benefits analysis) where the current 
coverage level would be increased to EUR 150,000 or EUR 250,000 for natural persons 
and up to EUR 1 million for eligible legal persons (in other words, corporates). 
The EBA analysis shows that increasing the current coverage level would bring limited 
added value in terms of protection, yet significant costs for DGSs: 
The coverage level of EUR 100,000 continues to be well above the amount an average 
depositor holds, despite inflation over said period. The analysis shows that a 
potential increase of the coverage level would have no impact on the vast majority of 
depositors, as they are already f ully covered anyway . [ . . . ] any of the assessed 
potential increases in coverage, while being costly, would have positive but limited 
impact on financial stability and consumer protection, and a somewhat negative 
impact on moral hazard (EBA 2023, 5). 
Namely, the EBA points out that: 
The data collected shows that currently across the EEA countries, 96% of depositors 
are fully covered, meaning that, in case of bank failure, they would be paid back the 
full amount of their respective deposit. The 4% of deposit ors that are not fully 
covered are mostly companies, and, despite being few in number, they hold more 
than half of deposits held in the EEA. (EBA 2023, 5)40 
A recent European Central Bank (ECB) analysis focuses on the adequacy of run-off rates 
and, more generally, on the assumptions underpinning the LCR framework. It is observed 
that “the March turmoil has not resulted in significantly higher outflow rates for 
 
37 Directive 2014/49/EU (DGSD 2014). 
38 In the analysis, we assume that Article 6 is consistently implemented across the EU. However, it is worth 
emphasizing that the EBA has published a number of opinions highlighting how the high number of national 
options and discretions have led to different levels of protection across member states (EC 2023b). 
39 The EU coverage level is also lower than in Australia and Norway, while Switzerland and the UK offer 
similar coverage limits (Beck, Iannidou, et al. 2024). 
40 Similar messages and figures—encompassing a global span—are reported in Van Roosebeke, Defina, and 
Wahyuni (2023) and Hüpkes (2024). 
17
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 20 ---
institutions covered by ECB banking supervision” and that “following the events of March, 
contagion fears remained short - lived amid solid euro area bank fundamentals. 
Significant institutions in the euro area did not experience considerably higher net 
outflow rates since March 2023” (Wildmann et al. 2023, 2–3). These observations are in 
line with the fact that , in Europe, SVB-like business models (extreme concentration of 
uncovered deposits all raised from the same industry sector) have not been recorded. 
Overall, the analysis mentioned seems to point, at least at the EU leve l, toward the non-
necessity to call for an increase of current DGS coverage levels  for natural persons ’ 
deposit accounts. By contrast, for corporate deposit accounts , the EBA analysis appears 
less clear -cut in its conclusion, as it permits only to observe that enhancing their 
protection by increasing their coverage level to E UR 1 million would have limited 
impacts. E ven at this coverage level , on average , there would s till be less than half of 
eligible deposits fully covered, so run risk would not be fully addressed. On the one hand, 
EU banks are exposed to the risk of runs originating from a low number of depositors, 
holding large and uncovered balances. On the other h and, it  seems very difficult to 
meaningfully cover such deposits without substantially increasing moral hazard.41 
On the whole, from a financial stability perspective , it seems that , at the international 
level (including the European level), a better understanding of banks’ deposit structure 
would be useful to monitor and assess system -wide vulnerabilities and bank-level 
liquidity risks. Sometimes, authorities have more information on banks ’ assets than on 
banks’ deposits. A first step to address risks  originating from banks more sensi tive to 
runs (that is, where the ratio of uninsured depositors may lead to imbalances) could thus 
be to subject such entities to closer and more intrusive supervisory monitoring. A second 
step could be to assess deposit ma turities, the type and concentration of deposits, 
eventually imposing concentration limits on uncovered deposits, similarly to the large 
exposure regime already applied on the banks’ asset side (Beck, Iannidou, et al. 2024).42 
An important issue is represented, in Europe, by the low possibility of EU DGSs to support 
the continuity of the deposit franchise in resolution  (and also in measures alternative to 
piecemeal liquidation). As we have seen in the previous paragraph, in addition to their 
classic paybox function in liquidation, DGSs can also have a funding role in resolution, 
acting as loss absorbers and risk minimi zers (Gortsos 2016 ; Gortsos 2019). Although 
national DGSs can intervene in resolution under Article 109 of the B ank Recovery and 
Resolution Directive (BRRD), such intervention is currently constrained by the EU legal 
framework—particularly by the “super priority” enjoyed by the DGSs in the creditors ’ 
hierarchy.43 Thanks to the super priority, DGSs subrogat ed to covered depositors after 
the exercise of the paybox function are the first in line to recover losses in a liquidation 
procedure. As a consequence, their intervention in financing the resolution procedure 
(for example , facilitating a transfer strategy) is unlikely to meet the least -cost test, 
according to which the cost of resolution for the DGS should not be greater than the cost 
incurred in case of liquidation. This limitation may be particularly problematic for 
 
41 See the reservations we express in relation to the proposal to extend the DGS to all deposits in Section 
III.1. 
42 A concentration limit would intervene on excessive shares of uninsured deposits or an excessive share 
of deposits among the 10 largest providers of short-term funding. 
43 Directive 2014/59/EU (BRRD 2014). 
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 21 ---
medium-sized banks, which are unlikely t o meet the requirement to access the SRF  —
which requires the bail-in of at least 8% of total outstanding liabilities—without a haircut 
on uncovered deposits. 44 In other words, t his class of banks may not have any funding 
tool available to timely transfer t he deposit base of the failing banks —including 
uncovered deposits—in the context of resolution. 
To address this challenge, the European Commission has recently tabled a legislative 
proposal—the crisis management and deposit insurance review. The proposal increases 
the options and tools available to supervisory and resolution authorities for the 
management of a banking crisis and provides a pragmatic and efficient solution for the 
problem of midsized banks. The proposal would, inter alia, establish a general depositor 
preference rule to replace the current super priority of covered deposits , allowing 
national DGSs to act as financing bridge, after MREL resources have been depleted, to 
allow medium -size banks earmarked for resolution to reach the min imum bail -in 
requirement (8%) to access the SRF , where needed.45 The CMDI review would facilitate 
the transfer of uncovered deposits in resolution, similarly to the FDIC approach, thus 
contributing to the stability of the deposit base and the franchise value of the bank. The 
estimations published by the SRB (Biraschi et al. 2023) show that the impact on industry 
funds would be limited because MREL would be the first line of defense for the banks 
earmarked for resolution and because of the relatively small size of the banks in question. 
Any compromise the co -legislators will find on the core elements of the proposal —for 
example, around the creditor hierarchy and the depositor preference —has to take into 
consideration that sufficient funding has to be unlocked  for resolution and alternative 
measures. 
However, the approval of the CMDI in a version that would keep the spirit of the EC’s 
proposal would still fall short of completing the Banking Union , and the EU crisis 
management framework would still differ from the US model, where there is just one 
single deposit guarantee fund with fully mutualized resources. Indeed, the capacity of the 
DGS to act as financing bridge would depend on the financial power of each national DGS; 
therefore, it could alter the level playing field among depositors of different EU countries. 
For this reason, it is crucial to establish the third pillar of the Banking Union, a European 
deposit insurance scheme (EDIS). It would allow better risk -sharing, promote banking 
market integration, and further enhance the credibility of resolution. In April 2024 , the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament (EP) adopted 
a position on the commission’s EDIS proposal, a so -called hybrid model, as it envisages 
mandatory support among DGSs only for liquidity purposes. This hybrid model could be 
followed at a later stage by the introduction of loss-sharing provisions.46 
 
44 Small and medium-size banks mostly meet MREL with own-fund instruments, as they don’t tend to issue 
large amounts of senior unsecured or subordinated debt. They therefore lack a layer of debt to be bailed in 
before uncovered depositors to reach the 8% rule required to access the SRF  (Restoy 2018). 
45 In Europe, MREL is set by resolution authorities to ensure that a bank maintains at all times sufficient 
long-term instruments to facilitate the implementation of the preferred resolution strategy.  
46 According to the ECB, the EU legal framework should also introduce a US-style “systemic risk exception,” 
as recommended by the IMF in 2018 on the occasion of the Euro-area FSAP. The exception would allow EU 
authorities to waive the conditions to use the SRF in emergency cases in which financial stability may be at 
risk (ECB 2023). 
19
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 22 ---
IV. Optionality and Flexibility in the Use of Resolution Tools 
IV.1 Bail-in and Transfer Strategies: An Overview in Light of Recent Resolution 
Cases 
In Europe, resolution planning for large banks has mainly focused on the open-bank bail-
in (OBBI) approach , according to which capital instruments and long -term debt are 
expected to be written down and converted to recapitalize the failing bank.47 OBBI is the 
preferred resolution strategy for the majority of SRB banks in the Banking Union (82%) 
but also for the largest banks in the United Kingdom  (UK) and Switzerland (BoE 2022; 
FINMA 2023a; SRB 2022).48 OBBI was preferred because it offered the greatest degree of 
autonomy: contrary to transfer tools, the bail -in can be implemented without the need 
for a third party (a willing buyer of the failed entity or, eventually, a bridge bank). Until 
now, however, the bail-in tool has played a limited role in recent European banking crises. 
In the Banking Union, i n 2017, Banco Popular was resolved by selling it  to Banco 
Santander, following the write-down and conversion of capital instruments (SRB 2017).49 
In 2022, when Sberbank faced a confidence crisis triggered by geopolitical sanctions, the 
main operating company in Austria was wound up, while the subsidiaries in Croatia and 
Slovenia were put into resolution and sold to local competitors (SRB 2023b). Outside the 
Banking Union, Swiss authorities favored a sale of Credit Suisse to UBS outside a formal 
resolution procedure, after the write-down of AT1 instruments and a severe dilution of 
shareholders. In the UK, the local subsidiary of SVB , whose resolution strategy was  
originally liquidation under national insolvency procedure, was instead turned into 
resolution and transferred to HSBC (BoE 2023a). In all these cases, the sale of business 
tool was preferred to the bail-in tool . The write -down and conversion of capital 
instruments was applied to support the transfer of the failing entity, rather than to 
recapitalize and return the bank to the market on a stand-alone basis as expected under 
the OBBI only approach.50 
 
47 We can distinguish two different approaches to the bail -in tool: the “open bank” and the “closed bank” 
bail-in (FSB 2023a). The economic effect of the two approaches is the same, namely loss absorption and 
bank recapitalization using internal resources (equity and debt), while the implementation approach 
varies. In an open bank bail -in, the failed bank is recapitali zed and returned to the market through the 
direct write-down and conversion of equity and debt inst ruments. In a closed-bank bail in, the majority of 
assets and some of the liabilities of the firm in resolution are transferred to a successor entity (for example, 
a bridge institution), while shareholders ’ equity and total loss-absorbing capital liabilities are left behind 
in the failed entity to absorb losses. In this case, shareholders and creditors are not formally written down 
and/or converted, but they are simply left behind in the old entity (with the expectation of recovering 
whatever is the value of the assets left behind in liquidation). The open approach is common in Europe and 
the UK, while the closed approach is used by the FDIC in the US. 
48 In Switzerland, FINMA’s strategy for both Credit Suisse and UBS was the OBBI. In the UK, all eight largest 
firms are earmarked for bail -in (six under a single point of entry [ SPE] strategy and two under a multiple 
point of entry [MPE] strategy). 
49 In particular, all common equity Tier 1  (CET1) and additional Tier 1  (AT1) instruments were written 
down, while the Tier 2 instruments were converted into new shares, which were transferred to Banco 
Santander for the price of EUR 1. 
50 Other resolution cases in Europe seem to confirm this trend. For instance, in 2021, the Polish resolution 
authority used a combination of bridge bank and bail -in to resolve a regional cooperative bank 
(Podkarpacki Bank Spółdzielczy). Danish authorities used the same formula to address the crisis of two 
cooperative banks (Københavns Andelskasse in 2018 and Andelskassen J.A.K. Slagelse in 2015). Finally, in 
 
20
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 23 ---
In light of the recent crisis cases, the FSB report on the 2023 bank failures recommended 
to use optionality and flexibility in the choice of resolution tools (FSB 2023a). In practice, 
the FSB report recommends resolution authorities put more emphasis on the 
operationalization of transfer tools, either alone or in combination with the bail-in, in case 
OBBI cannot be credibly implemented at the point of resolution. But although flexibility 
and optionality are good guiding principles, their implementation requires a certain level 
of preparation. Resolution planning involves intense efforts, while the resources of both 
resolution authorities and the banking sector are scarce. There are therefore limits to the 
capacity of resolution authorities to prepare in advance for multiple tools, or  the extent 
to which they can be combined.  For example, the FSB clarifies that enhanced flexibility 
should not come at the expense of the operationalization of the preferred resolution 
strategy. The question that we try to address is  therefore to what extent flexibility and 
optionality can be embedded in resolution planning without putting efficiency at risk. 
This question will be tackled having regard to the architecture of the EU resolution 
framework. In the following paragraphs , we first outline two examples of resolution 
approaches—in the US and Denmark —based on a certain degree of flexibility in the  
choice of bail-in and transfer tools . Second, we provide some preliminary reflections on 
flexibility and optionality in the context of the Banking Union. 
IV.2 Flexibility in the Use of Transfer and Bail-in Tools: The Examples of the United 
States (FDIC) and Denmark (DFSA/FSC) 
IV.2.a The FDIC Approach to Resolution: Bail-in Combined with Sale of Business or 
Bridge Bank 
The FDIC is responsible for the resolution of all insured depository institutions (IDIs) 
under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (FDI Act), as well as the resolution of financial 
holding companies under the Dodd -Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protec tion 
Act (DFA).51 Although the two resolution procedures are backed by different frameworks 
and different sources of funding, the approach undertaken by the FDIC to bank failures is 
broadly similar. 
Since the GFC, the FDIC approach has been predominantly b ased on transfer strategies, 
on the assumption that the best resolution outcome is to sell the assets of the failing bank 
to the private sector as soon as possible, either during resolution or shortly afterwards  
(FDIC 2023d; Shibut and De Verges 2021) .52 This strategy was shaped by the lessons 
learned from the 1980–1994 crisis in the US, and further reinforced by the successful use 
of purchase and assumption transactions during the GFC (FDIC 2023d).53 Liabilities and 
 
Croatia, a local bank (Jaadranska Banka d.d. Sibenik) was resolved through a combination of sale of 
business, bail-in, and the asset separation tool (Benahmed and Houarner 2023). 
51 Dodd-Frank establ ished a special resolution framework for financial holding companies, which is 
activated only in case it is necessary from a financial stability viewpoint through a “three-keys process ” 
requiring the explicit recommendation of two regulatory authorities and the final approval by the secretary 
of the Treasury (in consultation with the US president). Without the approval, such companies have to be 
liquidated under bankruptcy proceedings. 
52 The FDIC’s preference for P&A transactions can be explained by the following reasons: (1) to avoid asset 
overhangs and increase price transparency; (2) to reduce receivership expenses; (3) to shield the FDIC 
from political pressure deriving from managing large pools of assets; and (4) to save FDIC’s cash. 
53 Between 2008 and 2013, the FDIC closed 489 banks holding USD 686 billion in assets, with a resolution 
cost for the DIF of approximately USD 72.5 billion. 
21
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 24 ---
assets of the failed entity are transferred to a third party or a bridge bank, which can be 
sold at a later stage through a deferred P&A transaction.54 
The P&A transaction can be facilitated by loss-sharing arrangements financed by the DIF 
(FDIC 2017).55 While the FDIC is constrained by the least -cost test, which may lead to a 
haircut to unsecured depositors, the latter can be waived under the systemic risk 
exception in case it is needed to address a serious risk to US financial stability (Labont 
2023). For example, the exception can be used to avoid losses to uncovered depositors, 
as occurred for the resolution of SVB and Signature Bank. The cost of the P&A for the DIF 
is reduced by the economic bail -in of un insured and subordinated liabilities (such as 
TLAC debt) and shareholders’ equity, which are not transferred but left behind in the old 
entity (the receivership), turning them into claimants against the receivership estate. 
Although the FDIC has applied transfer tools to relatively large banks, P&A transactions 
remain untested in relation to G -SIBs (FDIC 2023d).56 According to Title II of the DFA, 
when launching a resolution of a US G-SIB using a single point of entry (SPE) strategy, the 
parent bank holding company  (BHC) is placed into receivership and its subsidiaries, 
assets, and certain liabilities are transferred to a bridge financial company. Most 
liabilities, especially those due to shareholders and unsecured creditors, are left behind 
in the receivership and absorb t he costs of the resolution. The FDIC could also use the 
Orderly Liquidation Fund (OLF) to provide a backstop source of liquidity to the bridge 
financial company, where needed.  The shareholders and creditors of the receivership 
would be allowed to exchange their claims on the receivership for securities of the new 
BHC, in accordance with the statutory creditor hierarchy (security for claims exchange). 
Consistent with the statutory obligations and the Title II creditor hierarchy, all losse s 
would be borne by the private sector. The FDIC would also oversee the repayment of any 
OLF support, the termination of the bridge financial company, and the closing of the 
receivership (FDIC 2024) . This outcome is very similar to the OBBI approach, as th e 
failing G-SIB is de facto not transferred to a competitor but rather returned to the market 
following the bail-in (albeit under a new legal entity). 
From this cursory summary , we can see that the FDIC adopts a “toolbox” approach, 
whereby multiple tools a re operationalized in advance and potentially used in 
combination. Transfer strategies (P&A transactions and a bridge financial company) are 
in principle preferred to ensure business continuity and deliver market -friendly 
solutions. However, the bail -in tool facilitates the transfer of the failing bank, as 
shareholders and long -term creditors are excluded from the transfer and left behind in 
the receivership (so called closed-bank bail-in). 
 
54 Section 210(b)(4), (d)(4), and (h)(5)(E) of the DFA. When deciding which liabilities to transfer, the FDIC 
must treat similar creditors equitably, albeit with limited exceptions.  
55 During the period 2008–2013, the FDIC used loss -sharing agreements to facilitate 304 of 489 bank 
transfers. 
56 The four largest FDIC resolution cases are the following: Washington Mutual, SVB, Signature Bank, and 
First Republic. Washington Mutual failed in September 2008 and, with USD 307 billion of assets, was at the 
time the sixth-largest FDIC-insured institution and the la rgest banking failure in FDIC history. During the 
2023 banking turmoil, the FDIC closed SVB (USD 212 billion of assets), Signature Bank (USD 110.4 billion), 
and First Republic (USD 232 billion). P&A transactions were used in all cases. 
22
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 25 ---
IV.2.b The Danish Approach to the Resolution of Small and Medium-size Banks: 
Partial Bail-in Combined with a Bridge Bank 
In Denmark, Danish resolution authorities—the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority 
(DFSA) and the Financial Stability Company (FSC) 57—have earmarked all banks, 
including SMEs, for resolution rather than piecemeal liquidation to ensure the efficiency 
and continuity of payments during a crisis, as the Danish payment system is based largely 
on electronic deposits (EC 2023c).58 They have also developed a special wind-up scheme 
for small and medium -sized banks with a balance sheet below the equivalent of EUR 3  
billion, which was used for the first time in 2011 to resolve Amagerbanken  (Andersen 
and Hovedskov 2021).59  
Following the DFSA declaration of failing or lik ely to fail  (FOLTF), shareholders and 
creditors are written down through the bail-in tool only to the extent necessary to absorb 
the losses faced by the failing entity  but without providing new equity (recapitalization 
amount). While covered depositors are fully protected, uncovered depositors are 
potentially exposed to losses, as they are not expected to be discretionarily excluded from 
the bail -in.60 The bank (which, following the bail -in, has a clean balance sheet but no 
capital) is thereafter recapitalized by a bridge bank—a holding company managed by the 
FSC—using the resources of the Danish Resolution Fund. The use of the holding company 
allows the failing bank to be recapitalized and to continue its operations, without the need 
to transfer assets and liabilities to another entity. 
The intervention of the fund to recapitalize the bank has been approved by the European 
Commission (Directorate-General for Competition ) under the EU State Aid framework 
(EC 2023c).61 Furthermore, the Danish Resolution Fund can recapitalize the bank even if 
the contribution to losses of shareholders and creditors has not reached 8% of the total 
liabilities including own funds (TLOF), as required in principle by Article 44(5) of the 
BRRD.62 The so-called 8% rule applies only when the Resolution Fund is expected to 
suffer losses, while under the scheme, the Danish fund would reasonably recover all 
 
57 The DFSA constitut es both the supervisor and resolution authority, being also responsible for MREL 
determination and the removal of substantial impediments to resolvability. The FSC drafts resolution plans 
(approved by the DFSA) and applies resolution tools when a bank ente rs resolution. 
58 At end-2022, the Danish banking sector was composed of 65 credit institutions, 46 of which were small 
and medium-sized entities. 
59 The wind-up scheme predates the adoption of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD).  
58 Concerning unsecured depositors, “Senior Unsecured creditors and deposits above the limits for the DGS 
are exposed in this model. With an orderly wind-down under the control of Finansiel Stabilitet, a substantial 
bail-in of senior unsecured creditors and deposits above the DGS has to be expected ” (DFSA 2023). 
61 The intervention of the fund was authorized on the basis of Art. 107(3)(b) of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union  on the following elements: (a) the scheme was implemented several 
times successfully; (b) it would ensure the least possible adverse effect on financial stability; and (c) it 
would allow the orderly exit from the market of sma ll banks. Each approval lasts for six months, but it is 
renewed on a rolling basis. 
62 The same rule applies for the use of the SRF ( Regulation 806/2014 [SRMR 2014], art. 27[7][a]). BRRD, 
art. 101(1)(d) allows the use of the Resolution Fund in resolution for the purpose of making contributions 
to a bridge bank. Art. 101(2) specifies that the principles governing the fund ’s intervention in resolution 
under BRRD, art. 44 (including the 8% rule) need to be complied with when the Resolution Fund is expected 
to incur losses. A contrario, the 8% rule is not applicable when the resolution authority can demonstrate 
that the fund is not expected to bear losses following its intervention. See also SRMR, art. 78(1)(d) and (3). 
23
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 26 ---
expenses through the sale of the entity or, in the absence of a private purchaser, the 
liquidation proceeds.63 
The Danish wind -up scheme  ensures continuity of functions (including access to 
deposits) through the recapitalization of the bank through a holding company (bridge 
bank), while the partial bail -in minimizes costs for the Danish Resolution Fund and 
reduces moral hazard.64 The potential bail-in of uncovered depositors —in case needed 
to withstand losses—may in principle lead to contagion, although the Danish authorities 
are fairly confident that unsecured depositors are aware of the risk of losses. Finally, 
there is a risk that a purchaser for the failing bank may not be found, leading to an 
expensive piecemeal liquidation. This occurred , for example , with the sale of 
Andelskassen in 2016, when an interested bidder failed to obtain the approv al of the 
supervisory authority.  Andelskassen was eventually  liquidated, while depositors were 
required to move their deposits to another institution before the closure (Andersen, 
Lintner, and Schroeder 2016).65 
IV.3 Optionality and Flexibility of Resolution Tools in the Context of the Banking 
Union: Initial Reflections 
Following the FSB report, policymakers in the Banking Union have also highlighted the 
importance of flexibility. The SRB is working to achieve “flexibility in the choice of which 
resolution tool to use, depending on the situation, working on back -up options ” 
(Laboureix 2023; SRB 2023a) . Similarly, ECB Banking Supervision has stressed the 
importance of optionality  in resolution , intended as the capacity “to choose the most 
appropriate tool for the situation at hand amongst a range of tools and be able to 
effectively make use of that tool” (Tuominen 2024).66 
It is worth discussing the principles of optionality and flexibility from the following 
perspectives: (a) legal feasibi lity under the EU legal framework , namely Directive 
2014/59/EU (BRRD) and Regulation 806/2014 (SRMR); and (b) the choice between bail-
in and transfer tools. 
IV.3.a Legal Feasibility under the EU Legal Framework (BRRD/SRMR) 
The EU legal framework encourages optionality and flexibility in the choice of resolution 
tools, albeit with some important caveats. 67 Resolution plans should foresee different 
 
63 In addition, the writ e-down of creditors beyond losses is not needed, as the bail -in aims only at 
addressing losses, without recapitalization. Hence , creditors are not expected to be converted into 
shareholders and provide a new ownership to the bank, as occurs under the OBBI.  
64 The application of the bail -in under the Danish wind-up scheme is also facilitated by the imposition of 
MREL to all banks, including small entities with a balance sheet below EUR 3 billion. 
65 The Resolution Fund was nevertheless able to recover losses t hrough the liquidation proceeds. 
66 It is noted that Tuominen, when speaking about optionality, also includes the capacity to timely use 
funding tools such as the precautionary recapitali zation tool (BRRD, art. 32[4] — SRMR, art.18[4][d]) and 
the use of DGS funds in resolution (BRRD, art. 109 — SRMR art.79), when the relevant statutory conditions 
are met. 
67 The content of resolution plans is governed by the SRMR/BRRD framework, as well as by  Delegated 
Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 (DR 2016/1075), which provides regulatory technical standards specifying, 
inter alia, the content of resolution plans. 
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 27 ---
crisis scenarios and follow different timelines. 68 For example, plans need to consider 
“relevant scenarios according to which the failure of the entity is idiosyncratic or occurs 
at a time of broader financial instability ,” or the circumstances in which “the bail-in tool 
could no longer be feasible if losses exceed the eligi ble liabilities issued by the parent 
entity.”69 This scenario -analysis exercise is expected to identify a preferred resolution 
strategy (PRS)—the default strategy—but also one or more variant resolution strategies 
(VRSs) to address situations in which the preferred resolution strategy could not be 
successfully implemented. 70 Each strategy needs to specify the resolution tools that 
would be applied, either alone or in any combination. 71 Resolution authorities are  thus 
expected to plan for multiple crisis  scenarios and retain flexibility in their resolution 
approach, either by preparing fallback options (variant resolution strategies) or 
combining different tools together (within the same resolution strategy). In addition, 
resolution authorities can always  deviate from the resolution plan at the time of 
resolution, applying different tools than the ones identified during the planning phase.72 
The legal framework also sets out certain limitations to the flexibility that can be 
embedded in resolution planning, to ensure that optionality does not come at the expense 
of the operationalization of the PRS. First, the choice of strategies and tools must be 
primarily driven by their capacity to achieve the resolution objectives under Article 14 of 
the SRMR and Article 31 of the BRRD; for example, a strategy cannot be included in the 
plan if it is not expected to preserve critical functions and financial stability. 73 Second, 
resolution plans need to be credible and feasible, with the consequence that  resolution 
authorities should assess whether a potential strategy can be realistically operationalized 
in a very short time frame, including during the resolution weekend.74 
IV.3.b The Choice between Bail-in and Transfer tools 
The cases of Banco Popular and Credit Suisse  (although the Credit Suisse rescue was 
executed outside resolution)  showed that transfer strategies can be effective in 
addressing a liquidity crisis driven by a loss of confidence. At least initially, Banco Popular 
and Credit Suisse were bal ance sheet solvent, complying with applicable capital 
 
68 SRMR, art. 8(9)(j) and BRRD, art. 10(7)(j). 
69 SRMR, art. 10(3), BRRD, art. 8(6), DR 2016/1075, recital 22.   
70 The legislative framework establishes a clear prevalence of PRS over VRSs. For example, the MREL target 
is calibrated exclusively on the basis of the PRS ( SRMR, a rt. 12d). Resolution authorities can remove 
impediments to resolvability affecting the implem entation of the VRS only if this is not detrimental to the 
PRS (DR 2016/1075, art. 25[5]). 
71 SRMR, art. 22(4), BRRD, art. 37(4). 
72 SRMR, arts. 23 (third subparagraph) 87(j) and BRRD, art. 91(6)(b). In resolution, the SRB should follow 
the resolution plan, unless the circumstances of the case show that the resolution objectives are more 
effectively achieved by taking actions not foreseen in the plan. 
73 The resolution objectives under SRMR, art. 14 and BRRD, art. 31 BRRD must all be pursued as extensively 
as possible, both in resolution planning and execution. They are the following: (a) to ensure the continuity 
of critical functions; (b) to avoid significant adverse effects on financial stability, in particular by preventing 
contagion, including to market infrastructures, and by maintaining market discipline; (c) to protect public 
funds by minimizing reliance on extraordinary public financial support; (d) to protect depositors covered 
by Directive 2014/49/EU and investors covered by Directive 97/9/EC;  and (e) to protect client funds and 
client assets. 
74 SRMR, art. 10(3) and (4), BRRD, arts. 15(1) and 16(1). 
25
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 28 ---
requirements and displaying limited need for bail-in recapitalization.75 The challenge 
was how to stop  the run of depositors and investors. In both cases, the merger with a  
more reputable competitor eliminated the loss of franchise, restoring market confidence 
and preventing financial instability. 
The sale of business tool —especially through a share deal —offers a swift solution to a 
banking crisis . From an operational viewpoint, the transfer can be executed without 
complying with any procedural requirement under company or securities law, other than 
the marketing procedure established under Art icle 39 of the BRRD. This simplified 
procedure alleviat es the execution risks to which the resolution authority may be 
exposed in case of bail -in.76 It also constitutes a market-friendly solution , because the 
purchaser, rather than the resolution authority, will be responsible for the restructuring 
and reorganization phase. 
However, the sale of business also entails its own set of challenges.  Most importantly, it 
requires a willing buyer, as the resolution authority cannot impose the purchase of a 
failing bank to a competitor .77 Unfortunately, it is not possible to know in advance 
whether a buyer will be available ; on the  contrary, this possibility becomes increasing 
difficult as the size of the bank increases  (FSB 2023b) .78 The transfer can also have 
negative effects on competition : mergers in  resolution involving a larger player buying 
another big local competitor  may exacerbate the TBTF challenge. For example, the 
merger of Credit Suisse with UBS increased the TBTF problem in Switzerland, and a 
similar solution would not be available should the new entity fail, as UBS has now become 
the only remaining G -SIB established in Switzerland. Competition concerns could be 
partially alleviated by cross -border mergers with banks located abroad, although there 
can be regulatory and political frictions. 
For all these reasons, transfer strategies are not superior to OBBI, as their choice provides 
for different trade-offs. In the case of  larger banks, for which a potential buyer with the 
necessary economic capacity and business interest may not be found, OBBI remains the 
best candidate as PRS. On the one hand, OBBI can be executed even in the absence of a 
prospective buyer, providing the highest degree of certainty to resolution authorities 
concerning their capacity to apply the PRS to a systemically important institution. On the 
other hand, the fact that the failing bank returns to the market post-resolution preserves 
competition and avoids excessive market concentration. A transfer strategy—either sale 
of business or bridge bank tool—can be envisaged as a VRS, in case the bail-in cannot be 
successfully implemented . Conversely, smaller banks have a larger pool of potential 
purchasers, and their transfer during resolution constitutes a more credible option. They 
 
75 “As of end -2022, Credit Suisse reported total shareholder equity of CHF 45.3 billion, a CET1 ratio of 
14.1%, a Tier 1 leverage ratio of 7.7% and outstanding AT1 bonds amounting to CHF 16 billion ” (Baudino 
et al. 2023, 21). 
76 BRRD, arts. 38–39. The marketing procedure under BRRD, art. 39 can in any case be waived partially or 
completely by the resolution authority in case it would undermine financia l stability or one or more 
resolution objectives. 
77 BRRD, art. 38(1), which specifies that the transfer can take place without obtaining the consent of the 
shareholders of the institution under resolution or any third party other than the purchaser. 
78 Looking at the list of G -SIBs (30 banks), it is clear that a failing G -SIB would have a limited subset of 
potential purchasers. For jurisdictions hosting only one G -SIB, the only possible transfer would be to a G -
SIB located abroad. 
26
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 29 ---
are therefore more suited to have transfer strategies as PRS, with OBBI acting as a Plan B 
(VRS). 
Finally, bail-in and transfer strategies are not only alternative solutions, but they can also 
be combined to achieve important synergies. We can imagine two scenarios: one in which 
transfer tools are used to facilitate OBBI and another in which the bail -in supports a 
transfer deal. In the first scenario, the sale of assets and liabilities to either a competitor, 
an asset management vehicle ( AMV), or a bridge bank is expected to help the entity in 
resolution to regain the confidence of the market following the OBBI. For example, we 
can imagine the transfer of a number of subsidiaries abroad to allow the bank to focus on 
its core business at home, and/or the disposal of impaired assets through an AMV to clean 
up its balance sheet . In the second scenario, the bail -in of capital and debt instruments 
can be used to absorb losses and lower the outstanding liabilities that need to be 
transferred, reducing the cost of the transfer for the resolution authority.79 The transfer 
of a failing bank occurs in an imperfect market, where the list of potential purchasers can 
be limited by the size and geographical location of the bank, the marketing timeline is 
extremely compressed, and the valuation of assets and liabilities is uncertain. Past cases 
in both the US and Europe show that healthy banks are often willing to rescue their failing 
competitors only in exchange for deflated prices, sterilizations from any increase in 
capital requirements, or loss-sharing agreements.80 The bail-in of a bank’s liabilities can 
therefore minimize the cost of such “facilitations,” which would otherwise need to be paid 
by the resolution fund. 
V. Liquidity in Resolution 
V.1 Liquidity Assistance in Crisis Scenario: An Overview in Light of the 2023 
Banking Turmoil 
The topic of liquidity in resolution is complex. When a bank approaches FOLTF and is 
resolved, it is likely that it has exhausted any source of liquidity or of eligible collateral 
for central bank ordinary refinancing operations. The focus is therefore on any form of 
private collateral, which can be quickly mobilized, and on temporary public funding 
mechanisms (resolution funds by the resolution authorities  and/or central bank and 
government funding). Here, there is a trade-off between ensuring an orderly and effective 
resolution process and avoiding moral hazard and any form of taxpayer financing (Dobler 
et al. 2016; FSB 2016; Tucker 2014).81 
In this section, having in mind the events of March 2023, we make some policy 
considerations on the features of an effective liquidity framework in resolution. This also 
 
79 “For instance, a bail-in of subordinated debt can help lower the outstanding liabilities in a transfer, thus 
reducing the amount of funding required to complete the transfer and increasing options for resolution ” 
(Baudino et al. 2023, 4). 
80 Recent research shows that the purc hasers of failed banks tend to accrue substantial accounting gains: 
They were 2.9% (on average) for 10 acquisitions in Europe post-BRRD; 2.6% for the purchase of Signature 
Bank, Silicon Valley Bank, and First Republic Bank in 2023, and 5% for the purchase of Credit Suisse (Bertay 
and Huizinga 2023; Böni, Kroencke, and Vasvari 2023). 
81 Of course, when liquidity needs are met by recourse to public sources, the first condition that should 
address any moral hazard concerns is the necessary temporary nature of t he funding support. 
27
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 30 ---
gives us the opportunity to draw some implications for the design of an effective public 
sector liquidity backstop in the E uropean Union. These considerations revolve around 
the following elements: 
Timing of liquidity provision (before; during , and after  resolution): An effective 
resolution action should aim at (a) reestablishing solvency by creation of an adequate 
capital layer and ( b) ena bling the entity to maintain access to liquidity (or to have 
sufficient collateral to obtain it) to refinance its liabilities as they fall due. Yet, while  the 
reestablishment of an adequate level of capital  would emerge out of a resolution 
proceeding, liquidity needs may still afflict the resolved entity since market volatility as 
well as  lack of information  and/or confidence may both restrain new parties from 
extending credit and prompt old creditors to run .82 The problem is also further 
complicated by the fact that  in some jurisdictions the resolved entity does not 
automatically regain access to monetary policy operations. 83 Such liquidity demand 
immediately after resolution has to be met, in order to avoid  another bank crisis  and 
further systemic impact.84 
Sources of funding : Here, the conceptual divide is between private and public sources 
(the latter usually referred to as a public sector liquidity backstop).85 
As regards the private sources of liquidity, they could be internal bank resources and a 
privately led banks consortium collectively agreeing to lend to , or deposit money in, the 
ailing bank, anticipating that it could be less costly for the industry to extend funds to 
such bank than to sustain the collective cost of its default.86 
At the other end of the spectrum and  bearing more relevance for the purpose of this 
paper, given the amounts at stake in case of crises of large and global banks , or 
alternatively of many small institutions experiencing simultaneously a liquidity stress ,87 
lies the temporary public sector backstop. Despite the  concept’s being rather loose, a 
 
82 The potential difficulty of the market to effectively assess the renewed solvency position of a 
recapitalized firm after resolution, and, thus, reliably extend credit to it, is remarked by many authors . See 
Brescia Morra et al. (2022), Demertzis et al. (2018), AFME (2018), FSB (2018), and Dobler at al. (2016). 
83 Depending on the resolution tool used and whether the legal entity emerging from resolution is different 
from the original one, the process for accessing monetary policy operations might take some time.  
84 The problem is further complicated by the fact that liquidity needs may already arise in the run -up to 
resolution. For the need to differentiate at least three different moments in time (pre-, in, and immediately 
outside resolution) when analyzing funding gaps, provisioning, and sourcing of liquidity, see the approach 
taken by the SRB ’s operational guidance for liquidity and funding in resolution—particularly, Paragraph 
41 (SRB 2021). In the literature, see Brescia Morra et al. (2022) and Demertzis et al. (2018). 
85 Drawing on the taxonomy adopted by the FSB in its guiding principles, the term “public sector liquidity 
backstop” covers the relevant public sector authority(s) and/or mechanism(s) in char ge with providing 
temporary liquidity to a bank in resolution, including resolution funds, deposit insurance funds, resolution 
authorities, central banks, and/or finance ministers (SRB 2016). 
86 Under this umbrella could fall the March 2023 move of 11 US banks of depositing USD 30 billion in First 
Republic Bank, in an effort to curb the panic the bank was object of, yet to no avail —as it is well known, 
First Republic eventually failed and was acquired, through a P&A deal, by JPMorgan (Benoit et al. 2023). 
In any event, in the case of banking groups , the  contingency plan shall fully address and operationalize 
internal liquidity transfers and collateral mobility (SRB 2021). 
87 A 2022 SRB Staff Working Paper estimate s the liquidity needs of a G -SIB in resolution as amounting to 
EUR 178 billion (Infelise, Lippi, and Vincent  2022). A similar conclusion —envisioning liquidity needs of 
EUR 184 billion—is reached in a 2020 ECB analysis (Amamou et al. 2020). 
28
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 31 ---
useful distinction to draw is between a mechanism pre-funded by the private sectors (for 
example, resolution funds or deposit insurance funds) and a temporary public funding 
backstop (in particular, the public budget and/or the central bank, the latter through 
ELA).88 The distinction lies in the lending capacity of the liquidity provider, as the former, 
unlike the latter, usually provides for predetermined lending support. The lending 
capacity of the liquidity provider critically impacts the credibility and effectiveness of the 
backstop. 
Against this backdrop, there are at least two different —but intertwined—topics raised 
when it comes to the role played by liquidity providers, namely: (a) the timing of their 
intervention; and (b) in case of different funding sources, t he sequences in which they 
can be drawn on and, more general ly, their interplay (some source s, for example, may 
play a role not as direct liquidity provider but by issuing guarantees to the bank). 
So, ahead of resolution , firms’ funding needs are usually satisfied either by market 
sources (most likely condition al on the acquisition of a secured position on the firm ’s 
assets) or by central bank lending facilities , provided that eligibility and conditionality 
requirements for acces sing such facilities are met. 89 Given that central bank lending is 
usually made available at interest rates higher than ordinary market rates, market 
sources at this stage may be preferred. 
In resolution, while it is commonly acknowledged that market sources of funding should 
have priority to reduce moral hazard , private markets may not realistically be available 
or willing to extend funds to the entity  (FSB 2016; FSB 2018) .90 Thus, at this stage , 
although resolution funds are the natural source of f unding, it is not inconceivable that 
other parties could participate and have a role too, either by providing additional 
liquidity support  (typically, the central bank) or ad  hoc guarantees for accessing such 
support (typically, the fiscal authority). Particularly for the case of the Banking Union, 
interactions among different authorities could play a critical role in ensuring the 
credibility of the liquidity commitment of the temporary public funding mechanism —
credibility that ultimately hinges also on the size of such a commitment. 
Immediately after resolution, and despite having reached balance sheet solvency and the 
required capitalization, the resolved entity could still have to deal with different forms of 
market failures barring it from accessing private markets. Thus, access to public sector 
backstops may be essential  to restore market confidence in the resolved and 
recapitalized bank. Here, the considerations just presented still hold: Access to centr al 
bank liquidity facilities may be a solution, conditioned though on m eeting central bank’s 
 
88 There are exceptions to this classification. This is the case of the European Stability Mechanism common 
backstop ( see Section V.2 ), which, despite belonging to the second category ( that is,  a public funding 
backstop based on the fiscal capacity of the member states), provides predetermined, and thus limited, 
lending support. 
89 These requirements usually revolve around proper collateralization of the liquidity support extended 
and adequate solvency status of the receiver. 
90 This hierarchical approach is also the stance taken by many jurisdictions. For a comparative analysis, see 
Grund, Nomm, and Walch (2020). 
29
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 32 ---
requirements for accessing such sources —but an entity coming out of a resolution 
procedure may still not be in a position to provide eligible collateral.91 
Conditions: The third element to consider pertains to the terms and strings attached  to 
the liquidity commitment —particularly when such commitment comes from a public 
sector backstop. Namely: 
• The size of the liquidity commitment : The alternative here is be tween, on the one 
hand, mechanisms capped by the size of the resources already  available to  the 
provider (typically, this is the case of pre-funded mechanisms), and, on the other, 
mechanisms where the maximum funding’s line capacity an institution could draw 
down is not known ex ante.92 
• Collateral policy and solvency requirement: Both these elements aim at ensuring a 
full repayment of the amount lent by granting the creditor and liquidity provider 
a secured position through adequate collateral (and with conservative haircuts) 
and (in the vast majority of cases)  by excluding the provision of the funding to 
accounting insolvent entit ies.93 A firm facing a restructuring process through 
resolution may lack, also immediately out of the process, adequate collateral to 
secure the liquidity support. And, of course, this could also very well be the case 
in the run-up to resolution—especially if the lack of adequate collateral prevented 
the bank from raising the liquidity needed from the market in the first place. On 
the other hand, particularly where the funding lines provided come either from 
the central bank or from the public budget and no ex post recoupment mechanism 
from the industry is fo reseen, it is all the more important  to have in place 
mechanisms capable of avoiding de facto bailouts. 
• Guarantee/indemnity provisioning : In addition to  collateral policy and solvency 
requirements, and to strengthen the repayment expectation of the creditor, third 
parties may provide an explicit guarantee to the liquidity support . This would 
imply that in case of non -repayment of the loan, such third  party would act as a 
loss bearer—and potentially a s an ultimate risk -taker if losses are not recouped 
ex post from the industry. 
• Recoupment mechanism: As per FSB Key Attribute 6.3, “Jurisdictions should have 
in place [. . .] a funding mechanism with ex post recovery from the industry of the 
costs of providing temporary financing to facilitate the resolution of the firm” (FSB 
2014). The existence of a recoupment mechanism from the industry acquires 
particular relevance in the event of non -repayment of the funds extended by the 
relevant funding arrangement, as it should rule out any bailout scenario from 
arising. It should thus apply both in case of backstop s to pre-positioned industry 
 
91 In this scenario, additional obstacles may also come from rating agencies ’ difficulties in assessing the 
credit standing of the resolved entity, ultimately impacting liquidity available as well. 
92 This is the case, for instance, with the UK regime, whereby liquidity in resolution is to be provided “in the 
necessary scale” (BoE 2023b). 
93 For an overview of major issues and considerations revolving around collateral as well as solvency policy 
see Dobler et al.  (2016) and Tucker (2014). It has also  been argued that limiting lender-of-last-resort 
financing to only solvent firms may be benefic ial in the sense that it could reduce the stigma effect 
apparently associated in accessing such funding source (Tucker 2014). 
30
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 33 ---
funds (such as  the E uropean Stability Mechanism backstop to the SRF in the 
Banking Union ) and temporary public backstop s for liquidity purposes beyond 
pre-positioned funds. 
• Rates: In certain jurisdictions , the extension of funds in a crisis is normally 
provided at higher rates than those prevailing in the market before the crisis.94 
• Duration: As the extension of liquidity is temporary by design (that is, the funding 
mechanism amounting in all respect to a loan), the need of the financing 
arrangement to provide for a reimbursement schedule is essential .95 In this 
regard, the various frameworks may be characterized by a different degree of 
flexibility.96 In any case, the need to provide some kind of confidence to private 
markets remains paramount. 
• Transparency: Transparency can improve understanding of backstop measures. 
However, transparency may also prove to be more challenging, as the 
announcement or the revelation that a bank is receiving central bank liquidity 
support may generate, or exacerbate, uncertainty about its condition, ultimately 
undermining market and depositor confidence.97 Striking a good balance between 
transparency and flexibility could help address the stigma traditionally associated 
with central bank liquidity provision.98 
Having in mind the above-mentioned taxonomy, we can now analy ze the features of th e 
public sector liquidity backstop s over the 2023 turmoil. Starting from the US episode, it 
appeared that a combination of two different mechanisms for meeting institutions ’ 
funding needs were deployed, namely: (a) a backstopping mechanism , through FDIC 
guarantees, for institutions placed in receivership procedure or for FDIC-directed bridge 
 
94 Penalty interest rates are applied in the Eurosystem, for the purpose of ELA provisioning by national 
central banks (NCBs). See Article 7 of the 2020 Agreement on Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ECB 2020). 
Grossman and Rockoff (2015) and Laeven and Bindseil (2017) observe that (a) the term “penalty” rate used 
for referring to such higher rates was in fact never originally used by B agehot; and (b) historically, higher 
rates accompanying liquidity provisioning in a crisis have not always been considered a necessary element 
in the history of the lender-of-last-resort function. For an analysis of different approaches to the pricing of 
lender-of-last-resort funding, see Dobler at al. (2016). 
Finally, in the UK liquidity in resolution framework, rates are “designed to incentivize return to market -
based funding”—which, of course, could also point toward higher rates as a mean s to incentivize the firm 
to return to a form of market-based financing (BoE 2023b). 
95 On the difficulty to determine what is meant by “temporary,” that is, on the different elements that could 
affect the effective duration of the support, see Dobler et al. (2016). 
96 For instance, the provision of ELA in the Eurosystem may exceed 12 months only following a non -
objection by the Governing Council requested by the governor of the NCB concerned  (ECB 2020). Under 
the UK framework, “the Bank’s objective is to provide liquidity [ . . .] for a sufficient period of time to allow 
the firm to make the transition to market-based funding” (BoE 2023b). 
97 Real-time transparency may be more effective to reassure markets and the public during a market-wide 
shock, rather than an idiosyncratic crisis, by signaling that the central bank is providing assistance and that 
the firms remain fundamentally solvent. 
98 On the role that stigma apparently plays on the functioning of the Fed discount window, see Ennis and 
Price (2020). Some proposals for reducing the stigma associated with the central bank lending facility are 
suggested by Solé (2024). 
31
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 34 ---
institutions; and (b) the Federal Reserve lending programs and facilities , which were 
enriched with a dedicated funding program.99 
As per the former mechanism, as it has been reported (Fed 2024a), the FDIC provided for 
repayment guarantees to support loans extended by the Fed, under its discount window, 
to the two bridge depository institutions of Signature Bank and SVB—such institutions 
only posted some collateral against the loans received  (Kelly 2024) . Equally, an 
outstanding discount window loan extended to First Republic Bank before it entered into 
receivership—and fully secured by pledged collateral —got its repayment fully covered 
by an FDIC guarantee, once the bank was placed into receivership.  The FDIC also 
extended a USD 70 billion credit line to the bank that acquired SVB to make sure it could 
cover withdrawals from SVB ’s uninsured depositors and other unfunded commitments  
(First Citizens BancShares, Inc. 2023). 
With regards to  the second funding mechanism —that is , the Fed lending programs —
what is relevant to underline here is that on March 12 the Fed, in the wake of SVB ’s 
demise, and to prevent the contagion from spreading, made available for all depository 
institutions the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP), an additional funding program on 
top of its primary credit  program at the discount window. The BTFP, whose design and 
objectives were deeply tailored to the challenges that emerged during the banking 
turmoil, differs in several respect s from the Fed’s primary credit  lending program .100 
Namely, those differences are in terms of: (a) eligible collateral, which was  limited to 
collateral accepted by the Fed in open market operations —for example, US Treasuries 
and agency debt (as per Title 12, Section 201.108 of the Code of Federal Regulations); (b) 
collateral valuation, anchored to the par value (that is, the outstanding face amount of the 
collateral) of the pledged collateral ;101 (c) haircut policy, not envisaging the application 
of any haircut to the pledged securities ;102 (d) term, whereby advances extended under 
the BTFP may have a maturity of up to one year; and (e) rate, which is fixed—that is, one-
year overnight index swap rate plus 10 basis points .103 Besides, and conditioned on the 
prior approval of the Treasury, funds of up to USD 25 billion may be made available as a 
credit protection to the program from the Treasury.104 BTFP loans were extended to First 
 
99 For a brief overview on the design and structures of the Fed discount window facilities (that is, primary, 
secondary, and seasonal credit) and also for the legal, operational, and cultural issues that have contributed 
over time to underuse of these facilities, see, among others, McLaughlin (2024). 
100 Under the “Purpose and Design” section of the Fed’s FAQ on the program, it is clarified that the BTFP is 
established “to make available additional funding to eligible depository institutions to help assure banks 
have the ability to meet the needs of all their depositors. The Program will be an addit ional source of 
liquidity against high-quality securities, eliminating an institution ’s need to quickly sell those securities in 
times of stress” (Fed 2024b). 
101 By contrast, under the discount window lending program, collateral is valued at its fair market value. 
102 Institutions accessing the primary credit discount window and posting the same collateral accepted 
under the Bank Term Funding Program would also see no haircut being applied. Otherwise, collateral 
eligible for the discount window but not eligibl e for the Bank Term Funding Program would be subject to 
customary haircuts and collateral valuation. 
103 By contrast, advances extended under the discount window are subject to a variable rate and may be 
extended for a term of up to 90 days. As of January 2024, the interest rate applicable to new BTFP loans has 
been set to be no lower than the interest rate on reserve balances.  
104 According to the last consulted Fed periodic report on the Bank Term Funding Program (March 12, 
2024), the Department of the Treasury was providing USD 25 billion as a credit protection to Reserve Banks 
(Fed 2024b). 
32
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 35 ---
Republic Bank before it entered receivership , and aggregate data released by the Fed 
shows that there was high demand for borrowing under this program (Fed 2024b). 
In the Credit Suisse case, an overall amount of liquidity assistance totaling CHF 250 billion 
has been provided by the Swiss National Bank (Expert Group on Banking Stability 2023; 
Swiss Federal Council  2024). Such assistance has been provided in three different 
tranches, each presenting different features: 
•  As Credit Suisse’s liquidity position was rapidly deteriorating, the Swiss National 
Bank made available on March  15, under its standard ELA framework, a first 
tranche amounting to CHF 50 billion.105 Conditions for accessing the central bank 
facilities mirror ordinary ELA req uirements, among which proper 
collateralization was needed for successfully drawing on the funds.106 And in this 
respect, “Credit Suisse ’s preparations for posting collateral to obtain enough 
emergency liquidity assistance were inadequate, especially at the  level of the 
parent” (Expert Group on Banking Stability 2023, 49). Namely, not only sufficient 
collateral of adequate quality was lacking at the level of the parent —so that 
central bank’s financial assistance could be provided only at the level of the Swiss 
subsidiary, where enough collateral was available —but liquidity upstream from 
the subsidiary toward the parent , and more generally, distribution and transfers 
across the group, was not possible if the activation of the subsidiary ’s emergency 
plan were to be avoided. 
• A second CHF 100 billion tranche, aimed at bypassing the obstacles highlighted in 
previous point , was made available on March  17 and announced on March  19, 
immediately after announcement of UBS’s takeover of Credit Suisse (Expert Group 
on Banking Stability 2023).  The support was provided  to both banks —and 
particularly, to Credit Suisse’s parent entity (SNB 2023). The provision of this form 
of liquidity assistance ( called ELA+) required a tailor-made emergency federal 
ordinance to enter into force (Swiss Federal Council 2023). ELA+ presented some 
peculiar characteristics : namely, it was provided without any collateral being 
posted by Credit Suisse and without any backstop guarantee provided by the fiscal 
authority while it granted the Swiss National Bank a preferential claim in the 
bankruptcy of Credit Suisse. All in all, as has been highlighted, the Swiss National 
Bank “had no control over the use of the liquidity provided [as] Credit Suisse was 
not in resolution and the existing management was still in post” (Expert Group on 
Banking Stability 2023 , 49 ). Despite this, the financial risk of non -repayment 
borne by the Swiss National Bank was limited, given Credit Suisse’s acquisition by 
UBS. 
 
105 For a review of the main characteristics of the Swiss framework, see Expert Group on  Banking Stability 
(2023). 
106 Under its ELA framework, the SNB can provide emergency liquidity assistance to domestic banks only 
if (a) they are no longer able to refinance their operations on the market; (b) the bank or banking group 
seeking credit is of importance for the stability of the financial system; (c) the bank is solvent; and (d) the 
funds extended are fully covered by sufficient and eligible collat eral at all times (SNB 2024). 
33
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 36 ---
• A third CHF 100  billion tranche, made available on the basis of the above -
mentioned emergency legislation, was granted to Credit Suisse and was backed by 
a federal default guarantee. 
The key elements of this public liquidity backstop were already set out in a 2022  draft 
Federal Council bill whereby the backstop: (a) is to be provided as an ultima ratio, only 
after Swiss National Bank ELA; (b) is limited to systemically relevant banks; (c) is 
extended jointly or right before the commencement of a resolution proceeding, so that 
the bank will fall under the control of the relevant resolution authority; and (d) does not 
require a concurrent posting of collateral, the federal government enjo ying only a 
preferential status in the potential insolvency liquidation of the bank  (Expert Group on 
Banking Stability 2023). 
V.2 The Banking Union Framework: Addressing Liquidity Needs in Resolution 
The architecture of Banking Union temporary public funding mechanisms has been the 
object of several analys es over the years  (de Groen 2018; Demertzis et al. 2018; 
Deslandes and Magnus 2019 ; Fernández de Lis and Garcia 2018; Grund, Nomm, and 
Walch 2020; Mersch 2018;). Drawing on the elements analyzed in Section V.1: 
• In the run-up and ahead a formal resolution declaration, and without considering 
private source of funding, a firm’s liquidity needs may be met either through 
Eurosystem monetary policy operations or ELA —provided the relevant 
conditions for tapping such liquidity sources are satisfied. Particularly for the case 
of ELA, which is extended at the national central bank’s risk and at its discretion 
up to a certain amount ,107 the ELA Agreement  includes: (a) provi sion of  
collateral—coupled with haircuts —and/or guarantees ; (b) individual and 
consolidated solvency requirement ; (c) maximum duration, which in theory 
should not exceed 12 months; (d) the imposition of a penalty interest rate; and (e) 
a specific prohibited scenario of ELA provisioning (namely, when its extension 
would amount to a replacement of fiscal policy , so -called monetary financing) . 
Coherently, and as recognized by the SRMR, “the need for emergency liquidity 
assistance from a centr al bank should not, per se, be a condition that sufficiently 
demonstrates that an entity is, or is likely in the near future to be, unable to pay 
its liabilities as they fall due (SRMR, recital 57).”  
• For resolution situations, the SRMR has established the SRF, an ex ante industry-
financed mechanism that, among others, may be used for liquidity support and to 
the extent necessary to ensure an effective application of resolution tools .108 Its 
capacity currently amounts to EUR 77.8 billion, representing at least 1% of the 
covered deposits of all Banking Union credit institutions. Such resources may not 
all necessarily be deployed for meeting liquidity needs, given that the SRF can also 
be used for solvency purposes, under conditionality .109 Such capacity will be 
 
107 “Where the size of ELA operations envisaged by one or more NCBs for  a given financial institution or a 
given group of financial institutions exceeds a threshold of €2 billion, on the basis of all the information 
available, the Executive Board shall decide in a timely manner whether the issue needs to be addressed by 
the Governing Council” (ECB 2020, art. 3.3). 
108 SRMR, art. 76(1). 
109 SRMR, arts. 76(1) and 27(7)(a). 
34
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 37 ---
coupled with  a common backstop of EUR 68 billion provided by the European 
Stability Mechanism,  once the ESM reform will be ratified by all the member 
states.110 Relevant elements of the concrete SRF liquidity support ( for example, 
size, duration, etc.) should be determined under the resolution scheme —and in 
this respect, these may include the posting of collateral. 
• In addition, nothing prohibits ELA provisioning during and after resolution—in 
this direction seems to point Article 4 of the 2020 ELA Agreement, whereby an 
institution is considered solvent also when “there is a credible prospect of 
recapitalisation”—provided though that all conditions for accessing ELA are met  
(Deslandes and Magnus 2019; Mersch 2018). 
Over time, some commentators have criticized the above framework. Criticisms have 
been directed both at the architecture  and design of the public liquidity facilities and at 
their temporal interplay and coordination. Namely: 
• As per central bank liquidity support , the main limitations of a pre - and in - 
resolution reliance on such source comes from the likely shortage of 
unencumbered assets of sufficient quality for either accessing the lending facility 
or simply renewing the ex isting ELA positions (de Groen 2018; Fernández de Lis 
and Garcia 2018). Also, as long as ELA is granted under the backing of a third-party 
guarantee commitment, should this come from a member state’s budget, then it 
may fall under State Aid legislation and  the specific framework for the Banking 
sector.111 In any case, reliance on national backstop measures would not be in line 
with a  truly European solution to the problem .112 Ultimately, the risk of ELA 
provisions rests on the national central bank balance sheet; that is, losses incurred 
by the latter are in principle not recouped through any ex post collection from the 
industry (Deslandes and Magnus 2019). 
• As per the liquidity support extended by the SRF , a recurrent criticism has 
revolved around its total capacity—which would amount, also taking into account 
the ESM common backstop, to roughly EUR 145 billion (de Groen 2018; Grund , 
 
110 The channeling of funds from the ESM to SRF is operationalized through a last resort credit line (meaning 
that it can be accessed only when all SRF resources have been exhausted and lacking other available funding 
sources to tap), extended by the former to the latter, and to be eventually repaid by SRF ex post contribution 
collections from the banking industry. Thus, the transaction would be fiscally neutral for the ESM as it 
would be funded by the banking sector, which would be the ultimate risk bearer of any non -repayment of 
SRF financial assistance. For more details on the architecture of the ESM backstop, see ESM (2021).  At the 
moment of writing this paper, the revised ESM Treaty has been ratified by all member states except one. 
111 See EC (2013). In particular, paragraph 62 describes how central bank ELA may constitute Stat e Aid 
where it is backed by a counter guarantee of the state. See also SRMR, recital 57, whereby:  
if [ELA] were guaranteed by a State, an entity accessing such a facility would be subject to State aid 
rules. In order to preserve financial stability, in particular in the event of a systemic liquidity shortage, 
State guarantees of liquidity facilities provided by central banks or State guarantees of newly issued 
liabilities to remedy a serious disturbance in the economy of a Member State should not trigger t he 
resolution framework provided that a number of conditions are met. In particular, the State guarantee 
measures should be approved under the State aid framework and should not be part of a larger aid 
package, and the use of the guarantee measures should be strictly limited in time. 
112 That is, the bank-sovereign nexus would not be severed, as institutions’ financial positions and recovery 
prospects would remain linked to the member states of their incorporation (Demertzis et al. 2018; Grund, 
Nomm, and Walch 2020). 
35
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 38 ---
Nomm, and Walch 2020). The capacity of the SRF to effectively withstand a crisis 
and provide sufficient funding in the midst of a crisis, in scenarios where any G-
SIB is facing distress, has been questioned in the past and on the basis of recent 
studies (Amamou et al. 2020; Infelise, Lippi, and Vincent  2022).113 We have seen 
that the management of the Credit Suisse crisis required the Swiss National Bank 
to commit and make available an overall amount of CHF 250  billion (that is , 
roughly EUR 264 billion). Of course, this does not mean that the facility has to be 
fully used, as in fact the sole announcement of its existence may be enough to 
restore confidence in the market . Yet, for this to happen, either the maximum 
capacity of the facility does not have to be revealed ex ante—this is apparently the 
case of the UK framework, whereby, some commentators have stressed, “there are 
no official caps on the scale, the duration and the rates applied to this type of 
liquidity support ” (Demertzis et al. 2018 , 10 )—or should be large enough to 
address the potential liquidity needs of the most systemic institutions. 
• As per the interplay between the different lending mechanisms, concerns pertain 
mainly to the firm ’s capacity to maintain access to a source of funding, whatever 
this may be, along the continuum of its fin ancial positions —and, namely, as its 
position deteriorates. The point is particularly relevant if one considers that 
access to SRF financing is condition al on the formal opening of resolution 
proceedings, which usually takes place over the course of a week end.114 Funding 
drains are in fact less likely to happen in such a period ; but nonetheless, funding 
gaps may have to be filled in the run -up to resolution declaration, and thus a sort 
of bridge financing function should be in place to “accompany” firms to resolution. 
Of course, on the other hand, such bridge financing function is less likely to be 
provided by Eurosystem financing as resolution approaches, as adequate 
collateral to post at the firm’s level is likely to get more and more scarce. The risk 
of funding flows drying up could thus get real. 
An alternative, should such bridge financing function not be possible and resolution be 
declared in the middle of the week, would be to rely on the r esolution authority’s 
moratorium power. This option has been recently used in the Banking Union, but it has 
to be always carefully assessed to avoid legal risks.115 
All in all, the crucial problem in the Banking Union seems to pertain to the identification 
of the party or institution better suited to provide  for a guarantee against ECB’s lending. 
In particular, answers should be given about who should provide for such a guarantee in 
the actual framework; whether this party should then be granted a form of active 
involvement in the resolution proceeding, given  that it would take on a risk -bearer role 
in the process ; and, more generally, how such guarantee should be overall designed. In 
this regard, the following reforms have been proposed: 
 
113 Historically, between 2008 and 2010 , the German bank Hypo Real Estate benefited from state 
emergency guarantee amounting to roughly E UR 145 billion; and in 2008 , Dexia benefited from a state 
guarantee provided by the Luxembourg, France, and Belgium governments amounting to EUR135 billion 
(EC 2010; EC 2012). 
114 The resolution of Banco Popular took place the night of Tuesday , June 6, 2017. 
115 Besides, pre-resolution and resolution moratorium might make it insufficient to curb liquidity outflows. 
36
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 39 ---
• SRB/SRF—or other EU bodies—guarantee:116 Under this proposal, the ECB would 
extend funds to a bank in resolution under its monetary policy operations 
framework against the issuance of a guarantee from the SRB/SRF .117 Although 
such guarantee should provide for an authentic European solution to the problem 
of an effective European public backstop in resolution, it leaves unanswered two 
questions: (a) The size and amount of the guarantee would be a function of SRF 
maximum capacity, which, as said, represents itself the main limitation of the fund. 
Considering that any commitment exceeding such capacity may be offered only to 
the extent that a form of ex  post recoupment mechanism from the industry is 
established and effectively drawn down ,118 it remains to be seen whether a 
guarantee based not on the presence of actual resources, so available and payable 
“at first demand,” but on the power to collect them ex post could be accepted.119 
(b) It also remains to be seen if, to the extent that a form of credit valuation of the 
guarantor is mandated under the lending facility, an SRB/SRF guarantee could 
meet the required credit worthiness rating, given that SRB credit standing —and 
its deterioration—is likely to be correlated with the occurrence of banking shocks. 
Alternatively, and in the absence of a euro area  fiscal body or, more generally, a 
European-level guarantee framework , it has been proposed that such guarantee 
could be provided: (a) by the ESM—yet as pointed out, at this moment in time, the 
reform of the ESM Treaty envisages a different role for the ESM in resolution, in 
the form of a common backstop to the SRF—or (b) by the EU budget, which “would 
send a better signal of joint liability of EU Member States ” (Beck, Krahnen, et al. 
2022, 9). 
Particularly for th is latter  proposal, one could assume a leading ro le of the 
European Commission in the process, based on joint borrowing through European 
Commission emission of E urobonds. Setting aside any political implications, t his 
solution, if considered and enacted, would probably be  the one better suited to 
address the issues raised by the current European framework for liquidity in  
resolution.120 Furthermore, such solution could be considered in conjunction with 
the broader SRB repayment capacity such that the SRB could effectively backstop 
 
116 Namely, (a) for an SRB/SRF guarantee, see de Groen (2018) , Demertzis et al. (2018) , Deslandes and 
Magnus (2019), and Fernández de Lis and Garcia (2018); (b) for an ESM guarantee, see Demertzis et al. 
(2018) and Deslandes and Magnus (2019); and (c) for a general EU budget guarantee, see Beck , Krahnen, 
et al. (2022). 
117 The guarantee should be provided against a premium paid by the beneficiary bank (de Groen 2018). 
118 The current framework ( SRMR, art. 71) already envisaged the possibility to collect  “extraordinary ex 
post contributions” from institutions. These may be collected where the available financial means are not 
sufficient to cover the losses, costs, or other expenses incurred by the use of the fund in resolution actions. 
Such additional contributions may not exceed three times the annual amount of contributions. 
119 This point seems to be stressed by Mersch (2018), on the questionability of accepting a “blanket 
guarantee ad personam ” as a replacement of collateral ( that is, a guarantee in rem) for monetary policy 
operations. By co ntrast, Demertzis et al. (2018) is critical and “consider[s] an exaggerated demand if the 
ECB requires guarantees to be immediately liquid ,” also considering that “also in normal monetary policy 
operations, the collateral held by the ECB is not necessarily  more liquid.” 
120 Among other things, a solution of the sort should also address and consider the asymmetry between the 
European Union—with 27 member states—and the Banking Union—with 21 member states. 
37
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 40 ---
the European guarantee with ex post contributions, to be raised only in case of 
need. 
• Issuance of SRB/SRF bonds as collateral for repos : Under such a proposal, the SRB 
would “issue and hold long term bonds, instead of selling them to investors ” 
(Deslandes and Magn us 2019, 12). The bonds would then be lent to the bank in 
resolution, which could in turn use these securities as collateral for obtaining 
liquidity—most likely through central bank refinancing operations, as private 
sources of funding would not be available at that time. Yet, problems could arise 
also under this  proposal. Setting aside the operational needs to have the SRB 
become an “eligible issuer” for credit rating purposes, any credit ratings assigned 
to its bonds would eventually reflect, as noted previously, the credit standing of 
the SRB, which is likely to be affected in a resolution scenario. If the valuation as 
well as eligibility of the collateral is conditioned on an issuer ’s creditworthiness, 
then one can see how challenges may arise for the feasibility of this solution. Also, 
it should be analy zed whether  the ECB collateral policy should be amended to 
recognize eligibility of these types of SRB-issued securities, and their haircuts. 
• Creation of a (new) Eurosystem resolution liquidity facility (Deslandes and Magnus 
2019): Under such a proposal , the ECB would be equipped with a specific 
monetary policy tool to be deployed in resolution scenarios. 121 Among the 
different conditions to which the activation of the instrument should be subject, 
the (temporary) financial assistance is to be extended only against provisioning of 
a public backing, which could also amount, in the absence of adequate collatera l 
to be posted, to a “euro area guarantee .” In fact, it is precisely such form of 
European backing, at the moment nonexistent, that would make the difference 
within a framework where, otherwise, it is already possible to extend ELA in 
resolution—against adequate collateral or guarantee.122 
  
 
121 The creation of such a funding facility should be assessed, inter alia, under the lens of: (a) compatibility 
with ECB monetary policy mandate and treaty prerogatives and (b) relationships with SRB as well as the 
ESM. It goes without saying that the creation of this facility would entail significant institutional changes 
and reforms. 
122 In reality, given that provision of funding under this facility would be made by the ECB, an d not by a 
national central bank, as it is the case now with ELA, one could wonder whether such a reform would also  
entail, as a side  effect, a centrali zation of ELA upon the ECB. For a discussion on this point, see Deslandes 
and Magnus (2019) and Fern ández de Lis and Garcia (2018). For a call toward a centrali zation of ELA, 
which would require the agreement of all the members of the ECB’s Governing Council, see Draghi (2018). 
38
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 41 ---
VI. References 
Laws and Regulation 
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 of March 23 supplementing 
Directive 2014/59/EU, 2016 O.J. (L 184).  
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32016R1075 
Directive 2014/49/EU, of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 
on Deposit Guarantee Schemes, commonly referred to as the Deposit Guarantee Scheme 
Directive (DGSD). 2014. O.J. (L 173)  
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32014L0049 
Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 
Establishing a Framework for the Recovery and Resolution of Credit Institutions, 
commonly referred to as the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). 2014. O.J. 
(L 173). 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32014L0059   
Federal Deposit and Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2023. “Final Rule on Special 
Assessment Pursuant to Systemic Risk Determination.” Financial Institution Letter, 
November 16, 2023. 
https://www.fdic.gov/news/financial-institution-letters/2023/fil23058.html 
Regulation 806/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2014 
Establishing Uniform Rules and Uniform Procedure for the Resolution of Credit 
Institutions and Certain Investment Firms in the Framework of a Single Resolution 
Mechanism and a Single Resolution Fund and Amending Regulation (EU) No. 
1093/2010., commonly referred to as the Single resolution mechanism regulation 
(SRMR), 2014 O.J. (L 225). 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2014/806/oj 
Swiss Federal Council. 2023. “Ordinance on Additional Liquidity Assistance Loans and 
the Granting of Federal Default Guarantees for Liquidity Assistance Loans from the 
Swiss National Bank to Systemically Important Banks.” March 16, 2023 (in Italian). 
https://www.fedlex.admin.ch/eli/oc/2023/135/it 
References 
Acharya, Viral V., Elena Carletti, Fernando Restoy, and Xavier Vives. 2024. “Banking 
Turmoil and Regulatory Reform.” Centre for Economic Policy Research, May 2024.  
https://www.iese.edu/media/research/pdfs/77782 
Adrian, Tobias, Marina Moretti, Ana Carvalho, Hee Kyong Chon, Katharine Seal, Fabiana 
Melo, and Jay Surti. 2023. “Good Supervision: Lessons from the Field.” IMF Working 
Paper No. 23/181, September 2023.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2023/09/06/Good-Supervision-
Lessons-from-the-Field-538611 
  
39
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 42 ---
Amamou, Raschid, Andreas Baumann, Dimitrios Chalamandaris, Laura Parisi, and Pär 
Torstensson. 2020. “Liquidity in Resolution: Estimating Possible Liquidity Gaps for 
Specific Banks in Resolution and in a Systemic Crisis.” ECB Occasional Paper No. 250, 
November 2020. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecb.op250~c7a2d3cc7e.en.pdf 
Andersen, Jens Verner, and Mathias Semay Hovedskov. 2021. “How to Deal with Weak 
Financial Institutions: Experiences and Lessons from a Non-Euro Area Country.” In The 
Crisis Management Framework for Banks in the EU. How Can We Deal with the Crisis of 
Small and Medium-Sized Banks? Bank of Italy, Workshops and Conferences No. 24 
(May): 177–94. 
https://www.bancaditalia.it/media/notizia/the-crisis-management-framework-for-
banks-in-the-eu-how-can-we-deal-with-the-crisis-of-small-and-medium-sized-banks/ 
Andersen, Jens Verner, Pamela Lintner, and Susan Schroeder. 2016. “Andelskassen: 
Resolution via Bridge Bank and Bail-in Including of Uninsured Depositors.” In “Bank 
Resolution and ‘Bail-in’ in the EU: Selected Case Studies Pre and Post BRRD,” World 
Bank Group, Financial Sector Advisory Center (FinSAC), December 12, 2016. 
https://documents.worldbank.org/pt/publication/documents-
reports/documentdetail/731351485375133455/bank-resolution-and-bail-in-in-the-
eu-selected-case-studies-pre-and-post-brrd 
Armour, John, Dan Awrey, Paul Davies, Luca Enriques, Jeffrey N. Gordon, Colin Mayer, 
and Jennifer Payne. 2016. Principles of Financial Regulation. Oxford; New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198786474.001.0001 
Association for Financial Markets in Europe (AFME). 2018. “Liquidity in Resolution.” 
Discussion Paper, June 2018. 
https://www.afme.eu/portals/0/globalassets/downloads/briefing-notes/2017/afme-
rrn-discussion-note-liquidity-in-resolution.pdf 
Bair, Sheila, Joyce Chang, Charles Goodhart, Lawrence Goodman, Barbara G. Novick, and 
Richard L. Sandor. 2023. “Supervision and Regulation after Silicon Valley Bank.” Center 
for Financial Stability, October 16, 2023. 
https://centerforfinancialstability.org/research/CFSRegPaper101623.pdf 
Bank of England (BoE). 2022. “Resolvability Assessment of Major UK Banks: 2022.” 
Resolvability Assessment Framework, June 10, 2022. 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financial-stability/resolution/resolvability-
assessment-framework/resolvability-assessment-of-major-uk-banks-2022 
———. 2023a. “Statement on Silicon Valley Bank.” March 13, 2023. 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/news/2023/march/statement-on-silicon-valley-
bank 
———. 2023b. “The Bank of England’s Approach to Resolution.” Purple Book, December 
15, 2023. 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2023/the-bank-of-englands-approach-to-
resolution 
40
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 43 ---
Barr, Michael. 2023a. “Supervision and Regulation.” Testimony before the Financial 
Services Committee, US House of Representatives, May 16, 2023. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/barr20230516a.htm 
———. 2023b. “The Importance of Effective Liquidity Risk Management.” Speech at the 
5th European Central Bank Forum on Banking Supervision, Frankfurt, Germany, 
December 1, 2023. 
https://www.bis.org/review/r231204l.htm 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). 2013. “Basel III: The Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio and Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools.” Bank for International 
Settlements, January 2013. 
https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs238.pdf 
———. 2014. “Basel III: The Net Stable Funding Ratio.” Bank for International 
Settlements, October 31, 2014. 
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d295.htm 
———. 2023. “Report on the 2023 Banking Turmoil.” Bank for International 
Settlements, October 5, 2023. 
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d555.htm 
Baudino, Patrizia, Emily Johnston Ross, Bert Van Roosebeke, and Rastko Vrbaski. 2023. 
“Bank Transfers in Resolution—Practices and Lessons.” FSI Insight No. 55, December 7, 
2023. 
https://www.bis.org/fsi/publ/insights55.htm 
Beck, Thorsten, Vasso Ioannidou, Enrico C. Perotti, Antonio Sánchez Serrano, Javier 
Suarez, and Xavier Vives. 2024. “Addressing Banks’ Vulnerability to Deposit Runs: 
Revisiting the Facts, Arguments and Policy Options.” ESRB: Advisory Scientific 
Committee Report No. 2024/15, August 2024. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4941165 
Beck, Thorsten, Jan Pieter Krahnen, Philippe Martin, Franz Mayer, Jean Pisani-Ferry, 
Tobias Tröger, Beatrice Weder di Mauro, Nicolas Véron, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2022. 
“Completing Europe’s Banking Union: Economic Requirements and Legal Conditions.” 
Bruegel Policy Contribution Issue 20 (November 22). 
https://www.bruegel.org/policy-brief/completing-europes-banking-union-economic-
requirements-and-legal-conditions-0 
Benahmed, Riad, Manon Houarner. 2023. “Strategic Optionality in Resolution: 
Combination of Tools.” ACPR Working Paper on Resolution, December 20, 2023. 
https://acpr.banque-france.fr/strategic-optionality-resolution-combination-tools 
Benoit, David, Ben Eisen, Rachel Louise Ensign, and AnnaMaria Andriotis. 2023. “Eleven 
Banks Deposit $30 Billion in First Republic Bank.” Wall Street Journal, March 16, 2023. 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/jpmorgan-morgan-stanley-and-others-in-talks-to-
bolster-first-republic-4f9eeb76 
  
41
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 44 ---
Berner, Richard. 2023. “Chapter 10: Strengthening Supervisory and Resolution 
Frameworks.” In Acharya, Viral V., Matthew P. Richardson, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and 
Bruce Tuckman, eds. 2023. SVB and Beyond: The Banking Stress of 2023. London and 
Paris: CEPR Press  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1M067WVIlogb0Jtrsl33ggpbHIAtVjlR6/view 
Berner, Richard, Kim Schoenholtz, and J. Lawrence White. 2023. “Chapter 5: Evaluation 
of the Policy Response: On the Resolution of Silicon Valley Bank, Signature Bank, and 
First Republic Bank.” In Acharya, Viral V., Matthew P. Richardson, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, 
and Bruce Tuckman, eds. 2023. SVB and Beyond: The Banking Stress of 2023. London and 
Paris: CEPR Press  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1M067WVIlogb0Jtrsl33ggpbHIAtVjlR6/view 
Bertay, Ata Can, Harry Huizinga. 2023. “Do ‘White Knights’ Make Excessive Profits in 
Bank Resolution?” European Parliament, Economic Governance and EMU Scrutiny Unit, 
In-Depth Analysis, October 2023. 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2023/747872/IPOL_IDA(202
3)747872_EN.pdf 
Biraschi, Paolo, Riccardo De Bosio, Miriana Langella, Barbara Mainieri, Nuria Mata 
Garcia, and Lucia Orszaghova. 2023. “The Commission Proposal to Reform the EU Bank 
Crisis Management Framework: A Selected Analysis.” SRB Staff Working Paper No. 3, 
December 15, 2023.  
https://www.srb.europa.eu/en/content/staff-working-paper-series-3-commission-
proposal-reform-eu-bank-crisis-management-framework 
Bodellini, Marco, and Jose Luis Colino. 2023. “Global Thoughts on a Resilient Safety-Net: 
Preliminary Lessons to Learn from the Recent Bank Crises in the US and Switzerland.” 
Law and Economics Yearly Review 12 pt.1: 48–77 
https://www.laweconomicsyearlyreview.org.uk/Law_and_Economics_Yearly_Review_L
EYR_Journal_vol_12_part_1_2023.pdf 
Böni, Pascal, Tim Alexander Kroencke, and Florin P. Vasvari. 2023. “The UBS-Credit 
Suisse Merger: Helvetia’s Gift.” SSRN Electronic Journal, June 20, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4486417 
Brescia Morra, Concetta, Claudia Giustolisi, Federico Pistelli, Alberto Franco Pozzolo, 
and Andrea Zoppini. 2022. “Obstacles Are the Way: Progress and Regulatory Challenges 
to Improve Banks’ Resolvability.” Banca Impresa Società XLI, no. 3/2022 (December): 
489–518. 
https://www.rivisteweb.it/doi/10.1435/105854 
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Thomas Philippon, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Lawrence J. White. 
2023a. “Chapter 8: Revisiting the Design of Deposit Insurance.” In Acharya, Viral V., 
Matthew P. Richardson, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Bruce Tuckman, eds. 2023. SVB and 
Beyond: The Banking Stress of 2023. London and Paris: CEPR Press  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1M067WVIlogb0Jtrsl33ggpbHIAtVjlR6/view 
  
42
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 45 ---
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Kermit L. Schenholtz, and Lawrence J. White. 2023b. “Chapter 9: 
The FHLB Role in the SVB and Related Debacles.” In Acharya, Viral V., Matthew P. 
Richardson, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Bruce Tuckman, eds. 2023. SVB and Beyond: The 
Banking Stress of 2023. London and Paris: CEPR Press  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1M067WVIlogb0Jtrsl33ggpbHIAtVjlR6/view  
Cipriani, Marco, Michael Holscher, Patrick McCabe, Antoine Martin, and Richard Berner. 
2023. “Mitigating the Risk of Runs on Uninsured Deposits: the Minimum Balance at 
Risk.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), April 14, 
2023.  
https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2023/04/mitigating-the-risk-of-runs-
on-uninsured-deposits-the-minimum-balance-at-risk/ 
Coelho, Rodrigo, Jatin Taneja, and Rastko Vrbaski. 2023. “Upside Down: When AT1 
Instruments Absorb Losses before Equity.” FSI Brief No. 21, September 12, 2023. 
https://www.bis.org/fsi/fsibriefs21.htm 
Cookson, J. Anthony, Corbin Fox, Javier Gil-Bazo, Juan Felipe Imbet, and Christoph 
Schiller. 2023. “Social Media as a Bank Run Catalyst.” Université Paris-Dauphine 
Research Paper No. 4422754, June 24, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4422754 
Cutura, Jannic Alexander. 2021. “Debt Holder Monitoring and Implicit Guarantees: Did 
the BRRD Improve Market Discipline?” Journal of Financial Stability 54 (June). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2021.100879 
Danish Financial Supervisory Authority (DFSA). 2023. “Updated Principles for Setting 
MREL for Small Banks.” February 6, 2023. (In Danish.) 
https://www.finanstilsynet.dk/media/52958/Modelpapir_om_principper_NEP_krav_ik
ke_SIFIer.pdf 
Davies, Paul. 2015. “The Fall and Rise of Debt: Bank Capital Regulation after the Crisis.” 
European Business Organization Law Review 16, no. 3 (September): 491–512. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40804-015-0017-8 
De Cos, Pablo Hernández. 2023. “Reflections on the 2023 Banking Turmoil.” Speech 
delivered at the Eurofi Financial Forum, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September 14, 
2023. 
https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp230914.htm 
de Groen, Willem Pieter. 2018. “Financing Bank Resolution: An Alternative Solution for 
Arranging the Liquidity Required.” European Parliament, Economic Governance and 
EMU Scrutiny Unit, In-Depth Analysis, November 2018. 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2018/624423/IPOL_IDA(201
8)624423_EN.pdf 
  
43
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 46 ---
Demertzis, Maria, Inês Gonçalves Raposo, Pia Hüttl, and Guntram Wolff. 2018. “How to 
Provide Liquidity to Banks after Resolution in Europe’s Banking Union.” European 
Parliament, Economic Governance and EMU Scrutiny Unit, In-Depth Analysis, November 
2018. 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2018/624422/IPOL_IDA(201
8)624422_EN.pdf 
Deslandes, Jérôme, and Marcel Magnus. 2019. “Banking Union: Towards New 
Arrangements for the Provision of Liquidity in Resolution?” European Parliament, 
Economic Governance and EMU Scrutiny Unit, Briefing, July 2019. 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2018/624402/IPOL_BRI(201
8)624402_EN.pdf 
Dewatripont, Mathias, Peter Praet, and André Sapir. 2023. “The Silicon Valley Bank 
Collapse: Prudential Regulation Lessons for Europe and the World.” VoxEU Column, 
March 20, 2023. 
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/silicon-valley-bank-collapse-prudential-regulation-
lessons-europe-and-world 
Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and 
Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 3 (June): 401–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/261155 
Dobler, Marc, Simon Gray, Diarmuid Murphy, and Bozena Radzewicz-Bak. 2016. “The 
Lender of Last Resort Function after the Global Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper No. 
16/10, January 2016. 
https://doi.org/10.5089/9781498355995.001 
Draghi, Mario. 2018. Statement at Hearing at the ECON Monetary Dialogue, European 
Parliament. February 26, 2018. 
https://multimedia.europarl.europa.eu/en/webstreaming/committee-on-economic-
and-monetary-affairs_20180226-1500-COMMITTEE-ECON 
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2021. “Banking on Deposits: 
Maturity Transformation without Interest Rate Risk.” Journal of Finance 76, no. 3 (June): 
1091–143. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13013 
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, Philipp Schnabl, and Olivier Wang. 2024. “Banking on 
Uninsured Deposits.” NBER Working Paper No. 31138, September 2024. 
https://doi.org/10.3386/w31138 
Ennis, Huberto M., and David A. Price. 2020. “Understanding Discount Window 
Stigma.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief No. 20-04, April 2020. 
https://fedinprint.org/item/fedreb/88293 
  
44
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 47 ---
Enria, Andrea. 2023. “Monitoring the Euro Area Banking Sector in the Aftermath of the 
March 2023 US Bank Failures.” Opening remarks before the Committee on Economic 
and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, March 21, 2023. 
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/press/speeches/date/2023/html/ssm.sp2
30321_1.en.html 
European Banking Authority (EBA). 2023. “Report on Deposit Coverage in Response to 
European Commission’s Call for Advice.” EBA Report No. 2023/39, December 2023. 
https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/files/2023-12/cfe9c89f-23ec-42d0-88fd-
fc873ff26c76/EBA%20Report%20on%20deposit%20coverage%20in%20response%2
0to%20EC%20CfA.pdf 
European Central Bank (ECB). 2020. “Agreement on Emergency Liquidity Assistance.” 
November 9, 2020. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecb.agreementemergencyliquidityassistan
ce202012~ba7c45c170.en.pdf?dca797da3212289956ac24df607eb168 
———. 2023. “Opinion on Amendments to the Union Crisis Management and Deposit 
Insurance Framework.” July 5, 2023. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/legal/ecb.leg_con_2023_19.en.pdf 
European Commission (EC). 2010. “State Aid – C 15/09– Hypo Real Estate, Germany, 
Extension of Formal Investigation Procedure and Temporary Approval of Capital 
Injections,” January 20, 2010. 
https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2010:013:0058:0066:EN:PDF 
———. 2012. “Commission Decision on State Aid in Favor of Dexia, DBB/Belfius and 
DMA. December 12, 2012 (in French). 
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/state_aid/cases/245074/245074_1520672_505_2.p
df 
———. 2013. “Banking Communication on State Aid.” July 30, 2013. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A52013XC0730%2801%29 
———. 2023a. “Banking Union: Commission Proposes Reform of Bank Crisis 
Management and Deposit Insurance Framework.” Press release, April 17, 2023.  
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_2250 
———. 2023c. “State Aid – SA.106526 (2023/N) – Denmark Prolongation of the Second 
Re-Introduction of the Winding-Up Scheme for Small Banks,” April 21, 2023. 
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/state_aid/cases1/202320/SA_106526_E06C2388-
0100-C63E-9881-D56C31E3BA4A_35_1.pdf 
———. 2023b. “Impact Assessment Report of CMDI Proposal.” Staff Working Document 
No. SWD (2023) 225 Final, April 18, 2023. 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52023SC0225 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 2021. “Guideline on the Backstop Facility to the 
SRB for the SRF.” April 22, 2021. 
45
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 48 ---
https://www.esm.europa.eu/sites/default/files/migration_files/draft_backstop_guideli
ne_-_early_intro_version_for_publication.pdf 
Expert Group on Banking Stability. 2023. “The Need for Reform after the Demise of 
Credit Suisse.” September 1, 2023. 
https://backend.efd.admin.ch/fileservice/sdweb-docs-prod-efdadminch-
files/files/2024/04/30/4d7bda2b-969f-4860-a949-2682d9849c69.pdf 
Federal Deposit and Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2023a. “FDIC Creates a Deposit 
Insurance National Bank of Santa Clara to Protect Insured Depositors of Silicon Valley 
Bank.” Press release, March 10, 2023.  
https://www.fdic.gov/news/press-releases/2023/pr23016.html 
———. 2023b. “FDIC’s Supervision of Signature Bank.” April 28, 2023. 
https://www.fdic.gov/news/press-releases/2023/pr23033a.pdf 
———. 2023c. “Options for Deposit Insurance Reform.” May 1, 2023. 
https://www.fdic.gov/analysis/options-deposit-insurance-reforms/index.html 
———. 2023d. “Crisis and Response: An FDIC History, 2008–2013.” June 12, 2023. 
https://www.fdic.gov/resources/publications/crisis-response/index.html 
———. 2023e. “Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Resolution Plans Required for 
Insured Depository Institutions.” Financial Institution Letter, August 29, 2023.  
https://www.fdic.gov/news/financial-institution-letters/2023/fil23046.html 
———. 2023f. “FDIC’s Supervision of First Republic Bank.” September 8, 2023.  
https://www.fdic.gov/news/press-releases/2023/pr23073a.pdf 
———. 2024. “Overview of Resolution under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act.” April 2024. 
https://www.fdic.gov/sites/default/files/2024-04/spapr1024b_0.pdf 
Federal Reserve System (Fed). 2023. “Review of the Federal Reserve’s Supervision and 
Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank.” April 28, 2023. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/review-of-the-federal-reserves-
supervision-and-regulation-of-silicon-valley-bank.htm 
———. 2024a. “Additional Information on Other Credit Extensions.” January 4, 2024.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/additional-information-on-other-
credit-extensions.htm 
———. 2024b. “Bank Term Funding Program.” October 11, 2024. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/financial-stability/bank-term-funding-program.htm 
Feldberg, Greg. 2023. “Lessons from Applying the Liquidity Coverage Ratio to Silicon 
Valley Bank.” Yale School of Management, March 27, 2023.  
https://som.yale.edu/story/2023/lessons-applying-liquidity-coverage-ratio-silicon-
valley-bank 
  
46
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 49 ---
Fernández de Lis, Santiago, Javier Garcia. 2018. “Funding before and in Resolution.” 
BBVA Research, May 31, 2018. 
https://www.bbvaresearch.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Liquidity-in-
resolution_vFm.pdf 
Financial Stability Board (FSB). 2014. “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes 
for Financial Institutions.” October 15, 2014. 
https://www.fsb.org/2014/10/key-attributes-of-effective-resolution-regimes-for-
financial-institutions-2/ 
———. 2015. “Principles on Loss-absorbing and Recapitalisation Capacity of G-SIBs in 
Resolution.” November 9, 2015. 
https://www.fsb.org/2015/11/total-loss-absorbing-capacity-tlac-principles-and-term-
sheet/ 
———. 2016. “Guiding Principles on the Temporary Funding Needed to Support the 
Orderly Resolution of a Global Systemically Important Bank (G-SIB).” August 18, 2016. 
https://www.fsb.org/2016/08/guiding-principles-on-the-temporary-funding-needed-
to-support-the-orderly-resolution-of-a-global-systemically-important-bank-g-sib 
———. 2018. “Funding Strategy Elements of an Implementable Resolution Plan.” June 
21, 2018. 
https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P210618-3.pdf 
———. 2023a. “2023 Bank Failures: Preliminary Lessons Learnt for Resolution.” 
October 10, 2023. 
https://www.fsb.org/2023/10/2023-bank-failures-preliminary-lessons-learnt-for-
resolution/ 
———. 2023b. “2023 List of Global Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs).” November 
27, 2023. 
https://www.fsb.org/2023/11/2023-list-of-global-systemically-important-banks-g-
sibs/ 
———. 2024a. “FSB Work Programme for 2024.” January 24, 2024. 
https://www.fsb.org/2024/01/fsb-work-programme-for-2024/ 
———. 2024b. “Peer Review of Switzerland.” February 24, 2024. 
https://www.fsb.org/2024/02/peer-review-of-switzerland/ 
First Citizens BancShares, Inc. 2023. “Form 8-K/A.” March 27, 2023. 
https://d18rn0p25nwr6d.cloudfront.net/CIK-0000798941/b2b8a75f-fbf5-49a5-8df8-
dc2823780b80.pdf 
Gorton, Gary. 1988. “Banking Panics and Business Cycles”. Oxford Economic Papers 40, 
no. 4 (December): 751–81. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.oep.a041885 
Gortsos, Christos. 2016. “Deposit Guarantee Schemes: General Aspects and Recent 
Institutional and Regulatory Developments at International and EU Level.” SSRN 
Electronic Journal, April 4, 2016. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2758635 
47
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 50 ---
———. 2019. “The Role of Deposit Guarantee Schemes (DGSS) in Resolution Financing.” 
European Banking Institute Working Paper Series 2019–No. 37, March 28, 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3361750 
Grossman, Richard S., and Hugh T. Rockoff. 2015. “Fighting the Last War: Economists on 
the Lender of Last Resort.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 10361, January 2015. 
https://cepr.org/publications/dp10361 
Group of Thirty (G-30). 2024. “Bank Failures and Contagion: Lender of Last Resort, 
Liquidity, and Risk Management.” Special Report, January 2024. 
https://group30.org/publications/detail/5264 
Gruenberg, Martin. 2023. “The Resolution of Large Regional Banks—Lessons Learned.” 
Speech delivered at the Brookings Institution Center on Regulation and Markets, 
Washington, DC, August 14, 2023. 
https://www.fdic.gov/news/speeches/2023/spaug1423.html 
Grund, Sebastian, Nele Nomm, and Florian Walch. 2020. “Liquidity in Resolution: 
Comparing Frameworks for Liquidity Provision across Jurisdictions.” ECB Occasional 
Paper No. 202051, December 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3742257 
Heider, Florian, Jan Pieter Krahnen, Loriana Pelizzon, Jonas Schlegel, and Tobias Tröger. 
2023. “European Lessons from Silicon Valley Bank Resolution: A Plea for a 
Comprehensive Demand Deposit Protection Scheme (CDDPS),” SAFE Policy Letter No. 
98, March 2023. 
https://safe-frankfurt.de/policy-center/policy-publications/policy-publ-
detailsview/publicationname/european-lessons-from-silicon-valley-bank-resolution-a-
plea-for-a-comprehensive-demand-deposit-protection-scheme-cddps.html 
Hsu, Michael J. 2024. “Building Better Brakes for a Faster Financial World.” Speech 
delivered at the Columbia Law School, New York, NY, January 18, 2024. 
https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/speeches/2024/pub-speech-2024-4.pdf 
Hüpkes, Eva. 2024. “Ten Years on: Progress in Deposit Insurance and Bank Crisis 
Management.” Keynote speech delivered at the EBI Global Academic Conference on 
Banking Regulation sponsored by the European Banking Institute, January 1, 2024. 
https://www.iadi.org/2024/01/ten-years-on-progress-in-deposit-insurance-and-bank-
crisis-management/ 
Infelise, Federico, Francesco Lippi, and Michael Vincent. 2022. “Estimating Liquidity 
Needs in Resolution in the Banking Union.” Technical SRB Staff Working Paper, March 
2022.  
https://www.srb.europa.eu/system/files/media/document/20220328%20SRB%20sta
ff%20working%20paper%20Estimating%20liquidity%20needs%20in%20resolution%
20in%20the%20Banking%20Union%20FINAL_0.pdf 
International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI). 2014. “Core Principles for Effective 
Deposit Insurance Systems.” November 2014. 
https://www.iadi.org/en/core-principles-and-guidance/core-principles/ 
48
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 51 ---
———. 2023. “The 2023 Banking Turmoil and Deposit Insurance Systems: Potential 
Implications and Emerging Policy Issues.” SSRN Electronic Journal, December 15, 2023.  
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4688929 
Kaminska, Izabella. 2024. “A Quiet Revolution Rocks Central Banking.” Politico, January 
19, 2024. 
https://www.politico.eu/article/pre-positioning-quiet-revolution-rocking-central-
banking/ 
Kelly Steven. 2024. “How the FDIC Sourced Crisis-Time Fed Funding through the Failed 
Banks of 2023.” Yale School of Management, August 20, 2024. 
https://som.yale.edu/story/2024/how-fdic-sourced-crisis-time-fed-funding-through-
failed-banks-2023 
King, Mervyn. 2016. “Rethinking Crisis Liquidity Provision.” NYU Stern–TCH Gallatin 
Lecture, September 13, 2016. 
https://assets.realclear.com/files/2023/04/2159_2158_nyu_stern_gallatin_lecture_201
6.pdf 
Krogstrup, Signe, Thomas Sangill, and Mette von Sicard. 2024. “Containing Technology-
Driven Bank Runs.” Finance & Development Magazine 61, no. 1 (March): 48–51. 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/2024/03/Containing-Technology-
driven-bank-runs-Krogstrup-Sangill-Sicard 
Labont, Marc. 2023. “Bank Failures: The FDIC’s Systemic Risk Exception.” Congressional 
Research Service, In Focus Note, April 23, 2024.  
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF12378 
Laboureix, Dominique. 2023. “10th IIF Colloquium on European Banking and 
Supervision: Dominique Laboureix’s speech.” 10th IIF Colloquium, November 21, 2023. 
https://www.srb.europa.eu/en/content/10th-iif-colloqium-european-banking-and-
supervision-dominique-laboureixs-speech 
Laeven, Luc, and Ulrich Bindseil. 2017. “Confusion about the Lender of Last Resort.” 
Centre for Economic Policy Research, VoxEU Column, January 13, 2017. 
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/confusion-about-lender-last-resort 
Lauren, Hirsch. 2023. “Silicon Valley Bank Sold to First Citizens in Government-Backed 
Deal.” New York Times, March 27, 2023. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/03/27/business/silicon-valley-bank-first-
citizens.html 
Martino, Edoardo. 2020. “The Bail-in beyond Unpredictability: Creditors’ Incentives and 
Market Discipline.” European Business Organization Law Review 21, no. 4 (December): 
789–828. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40804-020-00188-7 
McLaughlin, Susan. 2024. “Lessons for the Discount Window from the March 2023 Bank 
Failures.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 2: 72–84.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/3/ 
49
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 52 ---
Mersch, Yves. 2018. “The Limits of Central Bank Financing in Resolution.” Speech 
delivered at the IMFS Distinguished Lecture Series sponsored by Goethe University 
Frankfurt’s Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability, Frankfurt, Germany, January 
30, 2018. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180130.en.html 
Nyborg, Kjell G. 2017. “Central Bank Collateral Frameworks.” Journal of Banking & 
Finance 76 (March): 198–214. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2016.12.010 
Perotti, Enrico. 2023. “Measures to Prevent Runs on Solvent Banks.” Centre for 
Economic Policy Research, VoxEU Column, July 1, 2023. 
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/measures-prevent-runs-solvent-
banks#:~:text=Enrico%20Perotti,-
Founder%20and%20Director&text=The%20experience%20calls%20for%20norms,ins
urance%20and%20raising%20bank%20capital 
Restoy, Fernando. 2018. “Bail-in in the New Bank Resolution Framework: Is There an 
Issue with the Middle Class?” Speech delivered at the “Resolution and Deposit 
Guarantee Schemes in Europe: Incomplete Processes and Uncertain Outcomes” 
international conference sponsored by IADI-ERC, Naples, Italy, March 23, 2018. 
https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp180323.htm 
———. 2023. “Deposit Stability: What Should Policymakers Look At?” Remarks 
delivered at the “Deposits in the Spotlight–Do We Need to Rethink the Treatment of 
Deposits?” webinar sponsored by FSI-IADI, October 27, 2023. 
https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp231027.htm 
Ringe, Wolf-Georg. 2017. “Bail-In between Liquidity and Solvency.” Oxford Legal Studies 
Research Paper No. 33/2016, October 14, 2017. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2782457 
Rose, Jonathan. 2023. “Understanding the Speed and Size of Bank Runs in Historical 
Comparison.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Synopses 2023, no. 12 (May 
26, 2023). 
https://doi.org/10.20955/es.2023.12 
Shibut, Lynn, and Georges De Verges. 2021. “FDIC Resolution Tasks and Approaches: A 
Comparison of the 1980 to 1994 and 2008 to 2013 Crises.” In The Crisis Management 
Framework for Banks in the EU. How Can We Deal with the Crisis of Small and Medium-
Sized Banks? Bank of Italy, Workshops and Conferences No. 24 (May): 275–315. 
https://www.bancaditalia.it/media/notizia/the-crisis-management-framework-for-
banks-in-the-eu-how-can-we-deal-with-the-crisis-of-small-and-medium-sized-banks/ 
Single Resolution Board (SRB). 2017. “The Single Resolution Board Adopts Resolution 
Decision for Banco Popular.” Press release, June 7, 2017. 
https://www.srb.europa.eu/en/content/banco-popular 
  
50
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 53 ---
———. 2021. “Liquidity and Funding in Resolution—Operational Guidance for 2021.” 
April 30, 2021. 
https://www.srb.europa.eu/en/content/guidance-liquidity-and-funding-resolution 
———. 2022. “Resolvability of Banking Union Banks: 2021.” July 2022. 
https://www.srb.europa.eu/system/files/media/document/2022-07-13_SRB-
Resolvability-Assessment.pdf 
———. 2023a. “SRB Opens a Public Consultation on the Future Review of MREL.” Press 
release, December 14, 2023. 
https://www.srb.europa.eu/en/content/srb-opens-public-consultation-future-review-
mrel#:~:text=The%20consultation%20is%20part%20of,2023%20to%2013%20Febru
ary%202024 
———. 2023b. “Sberbank d.d. and Sberbank Banka d.d.” Resolution Cases, December 
21, 2023. 
https://www.srb.europa.eu/en/content/sberbank-dd-and-sberbank-banka-dd 
Solé, Juan. 2024. “Wanted: An Updated Understanding of Bank Runs.” European Stability 
Mechanism Blog, February 21, 2024. 
https://www.esm.europa.eu/blog/wanted-updated-understanding-bank-runs 
Swiss Federal Council. 2024. “Report on Banking Stability.” April 10, 2024. 
https://www.efd.admin.ch/efd/en/home/financial-affairs/report-too-big-too-fail.html 
Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA). 2023a. “Resolution Report 
2023.” April 26, 2023. 
https://www.finma.ch/en/enforcement/recovery-and-resolution/resolution-
report/archive/resolution-berichterstattung-2023/ 
———. 2023b. “FINMA Report: Lessons Learned from the CS Crisis.” December 19, 
2023. 
https://www.finma.ch/en/~/media/finma/dokumente/dokumentencenter/myfinma/f
inma-publikationen/cs-bericht/20231219-finma-bericht-
cs.pdf?sc_lang=en&hash=3F13A6D9398F2F55B90347A64E269F44 
Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority and Swiss National Bank (FINMA and 
SNB). 2023. “FINMA and SNB Issue Statement on Market Uncertainty.” Press release, 
March 15, 2023. 
https://www.finma.ch/en/~/media/finma/dokumente/dokumentencenter/8news/me
dienmitteilungen/2023/03/20230315-mm-
statement.pdf?sc_lang=en&hash=9E7D5CBED9519B41450D7D37643B482D 
Swiss National Bank (SNB). 2023. “Swiss National Bank Provides Substantial Liquidity 
Assistance to Support UBS Takeover of Credit Suisse.” Press release, March 19, 2023. 
https://www.snb.ch/en/publications/communication/press-
releases/2023/pre_20230319_1 
  
51
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 54 ---
———. 2024. “Guidelines of the Swiss National Bank on Monetary Policy Instruments.” 
Monetary Policy Instruments, June 17, 2024. 
https://www.snb.ch/dam/jcr:bd390819-aec9-423a-84ee-
cd1ad042e4a7/snb_legal_geldpol_instr.en.pdf 
Tucker, Paul. 2014. “The Lender of Last Resort and Modern Central Banking: Principles 
and Reconstruction.” BIS Papers No. 79, September 2014. 
https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap79b_rh.pdf 
Tuckman, Bruce. 2023. “Chapter 4: Silicon Valley Bank: Failures in ‘Detective’ and 
‘Punitive’ Supervision Far Outweighed the 2019 Tailoring of Preventing Supervision.” In 
Acharya, Viral V., Matthew P. Richardson, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Bruce Tuckman, 
eds. 2023. SVB and Beyond: The Banking Stress of 2023. London and Paris: CEPR Press  
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1M067WVIlogb0Jtrsl33ggpbHIAtVjlR6/view 
Tuominen, Anneli. 2024. “Crisis Management: Reform on the Way.” Contribution for 
Eurofi Magazine, February 20, 2024. 
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/press/interviews/date/2024/html/ssm.in
240220_4~587cc11dd1.en.html 
US Department of Treasury, Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (US Treasury, Fed, and FDIC). 2023. “Joint Statement.” Press release, March 
12, 2023. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20230312b.htm 
Van Roosebeke, Bert, Ryan Defina, and Tri Wahyuni. 2023. “Uninsured Deposits: 
Relevance and Evolutions Over Time.” SSRN Electronic Journal. January 1, 2023. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4476253 
Wildmann, Nadya, Beatrice Scheubel, Luisa Fascione, and Georg Leitner. 2023. 
“Objectives and Limitations of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio.” ECB Macroprudential 
Bulletin, Focus No. 23, December 6, 2023. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/financial-stability/macroprudential-
bulletin/focus/2023/html/ecb.mpbu202312_focus02.en.html 
  
52
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4

--- Page 55 ---
VII. Appendix 
Banking Turmoil  of 2023 , Basel Committee on Banking Supervision /Financial 
Stability Board Lessons Learned for Supervisory and Resolution Authorities 
Take-Aways for Supervision 
Liquidity risk. There may be a need to review supervisory standards and practi ces in 
relation to liquidity requirements (in particular, as per the outflows rates currently 
assumed in the liquidity coverage ratio [ LCR]), reassessing the frequency of monitoring 
and the approach to concentration risks. The potential impact of unrealized losses on the 
liquidity position of the bank—and more generally, the accounting classification of liquid 
assets—also deserves further assessment. 
Implementation of the interest rate risk in t he banking book (IRRBB) standard 
across jurisdictions.  Interest rate risk was central to the crisis of US regional banks. 
Although such entities were only partially subject to IRRBB, authorities will further 
assess whether the current Pillar 2 approach can effectively mitigate interest rate risk. 
Analysis of additional Tier 1 (AT1) instruments and their role in the capital 
framework. Despite a difficult situation, Credit Suisse has continued to replace AT1 
instruments and to pay AT1 coupons, in order to avo id negative signaling effects. There 
is therefore a need to reflect on the role of AT1 securities in the capital framework, 
particularly their capacity to absorb losses on a going-concern basis. 
Scope of the Basel Framework. The crisis has shown that the f ailure of regional banks 
can trigger systemic consequences, calling for further analysis on the limited scope of 
application of the Basel (and resolution) framework, currently recommended only to 
global systemically important banks. 
Take-Aways for Resolution 
Effectiveness of the current deposit insurance coverage levels and moral hazard. In 
the US, the use of the systemic risk exception stimulated a debate about the measures that 
may increase moral hazard while aiming at safeguarding financial stability. Au thorities 
may assess the effectiveness of their current deposit insurance coverage levels and the 
treatment of uninsured depositors while considering moral hazard implications. This 
should also take into account how their deposit protection framework inter acts with 
existing prudential and resolution regimes (see Section III). 
Effective public sector funding backstop.  Authorities need to have in place credible 
liquidity backstops to restore market confidence in a timely manner when a bank is 
resolved (see Section V). 
Legal issues in executing a bail -in across borders. The demise of Credit Suisse 
highlighted the need to clarify how securities laws (prospectus and disclosure 
requirements) apply to the cross -border conversion of total loss-absorbing capacity 
(TLAC) bonds to equity in the context of the open-bank bail-in. 
53
The 2023 Banking Turmoil: Lessons for EU Resolution Authorities Cirillo et al.

--- Page 56 ---
Choice of resolution strategies and optionality of resolution tools.  Authorities 
should retain flexibility when carrying out their resolution planning activities, preparing 
for several crisis scenarios, without hindering the level of preparedness in the execution 
of the preferred resolution strategy (see Section IV). 
Post-stabilization restructuring plan.  Resolution authorities need to prepare a 
credible restructuring plan, capable of restoring market confidence in the business model 
of a resolved bank in the post -resolution period. Timely and efficient communication to 
the market is also essential. 
Communication and coordination between home and host authorities. Considering 
the increasing speed of bank crises, it is important to enhance coordination between 
home and host authorities, both inside and outside crisis management groups (CMGs). 
Authorities should also coordinate their communication strategies and communication  
outputs. 
Sources: BCBS 2023; FSB 2023a. 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which 
allows sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not 
be changed or used commercially. 
 
 
54
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 4