--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 3 
2024 
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections 
June Rhee 
Yale School of Management 
Benjamin Hoffner 
Yale School of Management 
Greg Feldberg 
Yale School of Mangement 
Andrew Metrick 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, Public 
Administration Commons, and the Public Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Rhee, June; Hoffner, Benjamin; Feldberg, Greg; and Metrick, Andrew (2024) "Survey of Ad Hoc Capital 
Injections," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 3, 1-34. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1569 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/1 
This Survey is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This survey is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol6/iss3/1

--- Page 3 ---
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections1 
June Rhee,2 Benjamin Hoffner,3 Greg Feldberg,4 and Andrew Metrick5 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Survey 
October 4, 2024 
Abstract 
Government recapitalizations of systemic banking organizations can be costly and 
unpopular but are sometimes necessary to protect depositors and prevent financial 
contagion. This paper surveys 23 Yale Program on Financial Stability case studies of ad hoc 
capital injection programs, defined as programs that provide capital to a single institution or 
a clearly defined minority of institutions. We saw  a marked increase in capital injection 
programs in the past 50 years, more than half of which were ad hoc. Authorities designing 
ad hoc capital injections face difficult decisions—when to deploy them rather than let a bank 
fail; whether to impose losses on shareholders and unsecured creditors; how to protect 
taxpayers; and how to deal with  the management of failed firms . Most advanced countries 
have updated their tools for managing bank failures since the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–
09, generally in compliance with the Financial Stability Board’s 2011 Key Attributes of 
Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions. Our survey points to the challenges 
authorities have faced over the years in attempting to adhere to such principles. 
Keywords: ad hoc, bail-in, bank capital, capital injection, recapitalization 
  
 
1 This survey reviews a Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project modules 
considering ad hoc capital injection programs. It references an earlier survey of broad -based capital injection 
programs (Rhee et al. 2022) . These surveys and the individual cases underlying them are available from the 
Journal of Financial Crises at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/. 
2 Director, Master of Management Studies in Systemic Risk, and Lecturer , YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
3 Senior Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
4 Research Scholar and Director of Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
5 Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of Management. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
Introductory Note: This survey is an analysis of important considerations for policymakers 
seeking to establish an ad hoc  capital injection (AHCI)  program. It is based on insights 
derived from case studies of 23 specific AHCI programs the Yale Program on F inancial 
Stability has completed and from the existing literature on the topic. While this survey can 
help inform a decision about whether or not to establish an AHCI program, our main purpose 
is to assist policymakers who have already made that decision in designing the most effective 
program possible. In analyzing the programs that are the focus of this survey, we used a 
color-coded system to highlight certain particularly noteworthy design features.  
Treatment Meaning 
BLUE – INTERESTING A design feature that is interesting and that 
policymakers may want to consider. Typically, 
this determination is based on the observation 
that the design feature involves a unique and 
potentially promising way of addressing a 
challenge common to this type of program that 
may not be obvious. Less commonly, empirical 
evidence or a consensus will indicate that the 
design feature was effective in this context, in 
which case we will describe that evidence or 
consensus. 
YELLOW – CAUTION INDICATED A design feature that policymakers should 
exercise caution in considering. Typically, this 
determination is based on the observation that 
the designers of the feature later made 
significant changes to the feature with the 
intention of improving the program. Less 
commonly, empirical evidence or a consensus 
will indicate that the design feature was 
ineffective in this context, in which case we will 
describe that evidence or consensus. 
FOOTNOTE IN ITALICS  
 
Where the reason that a given design feature 
has been highlighted is not apparent from the 
text, it is accompanied by an italicized footnote 
that explains why we chose to highlight it. 
Where necessary, these footnotes will be used 
to identify any considerations that should be 
kept in mind when thinking about the feature. 
This highlighting is not intended to be dispositive. The fact that a design feature is not 
highlighted or is highlighted yellow does not mean that it should not be considered or that it 
will never be effective under any circumstances. Similarly, the fact that a design feature is 
not highlighted or is highlighted blue does not mean that it should always be considered or 
will be effective under all circumstances. The highlighting is our subjective attempt to guide 
readers t oward certain design features that (1) may not be obvious but are worth 
considering or (2) require caution. 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Introduction 
Government recapitalizations of  systemic banking organizations can be costly and 
unpopular, but authorities sometimes decide they are necessary to protect depositors and 
other creditors and prevent financial contagion. This survey covers 23 ad hoc  capital 
injection (AHCI) cases, defined as programs that provided capital to a single institution or a 
clearly defined minority of institutions: two before World War II; two in the Asian Financial 
Crisis of 1997 –98; 11 during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2007–09; six in the post-
GFC European Union (EU); and two post-GFC cases outside the EU. In 2022, we published a 
survey on broad -based capital injection  (BBCI) programs, defined as programs that 
addressed all or most of a banking system to address a systemic banking crisis (Rhee et al. 
2022). The Metrick and Schmelzing (2024) database analyzes 1,946 banking crisis 
interventions from 1257–2019 across seven intervention categories. The database shows a 
marked increase in capital injections since 1972: they accounted for only 6 7 (6.8%) of the 
984 interventions before 1972 compared to 22 1 (23%) of the 9 62 interventions since 
1972—representing the most commonly used intervention tool in this period (1972–2019). 
More than half of the capital injection programs  identified were ad hoc . Additionally, the 
BBCI cases we studied largely had voluntary participation. In contrast, participation in all of 
the AHCI cases was mandatory ; typically, the target bank required a  capital injection to 
survive. This difference influences different designs in the programs, which we will discuss 
further in the survey.  
  
3
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1: Case Studies and Abbreviated Names 
Case Name Short-form Case Name Reference 
Austria and Germany: Hypo Alpe Adria Capital 
Injection, 2008 
Austria and Germany, HAA (Decker 2024a) 
Belgium and France: Dexia Group Capital Injection, 
2008 
Belgium and France, Dexia (George 2024a) 
Belgium: Fortis Group Capital Injection, 2008 Belgium, Fortis (George 2024b) 
Cyprus: Laiki Bank Capital Injection, 2012 Cyprus, Laiki (Schaefer-Brown 2024a) 
France: Bank of France Capital Injection, 1805 France, Bank of France (George 2024c) 
Germany: HSH Nordbank Capital Injection, 2009 Germany, HSH (Makhija 2024a) 
Germany: IKB Deutsche Industriebank Capital 
Injection, 2008 
Germany, IKB (Swaminathan and Vala 
2024) 
Greece: ATE Bank Capital Injection, 2011 Greece, ATE (Schaefer-Brown 2024b) 
Greece: Piraeus Bank Capital Injection, 2015 Greece, Piraeus (Schaefer-Brown 2024c) 
Iceland: Arion Bank, Islandsbanki, and Landsbankinn 
Capital Injection, 2008 
Iceland (George 2024d) 
India: Yes Bank Capital Injection, 2020 India, Yes Bank (Gupta 2024) 
Italy: Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena Capital 
Injection, 2017 
Italy, MPS (Hoffner 2024a) 
Japan: Nippon Credit Bank Capital Injection, 1997 Japan, NCB (Heaphy 2024) 
Korea: Korea First Bank and Seoul Bank Capital 
Injection, 1997 
Korea, KFB and SB (Park and Heaphy 2024) 
Latvia: Parex Bank Capital Injection, 2008 Latvia, Parex (Decker 2024b) 
Netherlands: SNS Reaal Capital Injection, 2013 Netherlands, SNS Reaal (George 2024e) 
Portugal: Banco Espírito Santo Capital Injection, 2014 Portugal, BES (Novo 
Banco) 
(Gupta and Brandon 2024) 
Russia: Otkritie Bank Capital Injection, 2017 Russia, Otkritie (Hoffner 2024b) 
Spain: Caja de Ahorros Castilla–La Mancha Capital 
Injection, 2009 
Spain, CCM (Swaminathan 2024) 
Switzerland: Schweizerische Volksbank Capital 
Injection, 1933 
Switzerland, Volksbank (Makhija 2024b) 
Switzerland: UBS Capital Injection, 2008 Switzerland, UBS (Makhija 2024c) 
United States: Bank of America Capital Injection, 
2009 
US, BofA (Hoffner and Arnold 2024a) 
United States: Citigroup Capital Injection, 2008 US, Citi (Hoffner and Arnold 2024b) 
Source: Authors’ compilation. 
In most AHCI cases, governments applied some basic principles to recapitalizations , 
including raising private capital first, imposing losses on private investors, promoting new 
management, improving oversight, etc. Since the GFC, these basic principles have been 
incorporated into regulations across the world. In 2011, regulators in advanced economies 
agreed to Key Attributes  of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions  to make 
bailouts less likely and less costly  (Financial Stability Board 2014) . The key attribute on 
funding of firms in resolution states principles a round authorities providing temporary 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
funding to banks, including a goal of preserving financial stability and allocation of losses to 
stakeholders.  
These key attributes were incorporated m ost notably  by the European Union , with the 
adoption of the Bank R ecovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) in 2014. The BRRD  
established a common framework for the resolution of failing banks  and lays out general 
principles for capital injections outside and inside resolution . For capital injections outside 
resolution, the BRRD requires that aid should be confined to solvent institutions and be of a 
precautionary and temporary nature. Another principle, generally applying to both 
situations, includes the use of a bail-in tool, ensuring that the bank’s losses are first borne by 
shareholders and creditors.  
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) published a paper in 2020 summarizing general 
principles for managing systemic banking crises, based on the views and experience of its 
staff. Its principles around government capital injections were: (1) Recapitalizations should 
be made only to address systemic risks ; (2) private shareholders and unsecured creditors 
should share in  the loss burden; (3) public taxpayers should be remunerated and share in 
any upside from a bank’s recovery ; ( 4) m anagement should be replaced , and some 
jurisdictions also could seek to have compensation capped and bonuses clawed back ; (5) 
authorities should maintain strict oversight of recapitalized firms to protect taxpayers and 
establish independent oversight and ex post reviews ; and ( 6) the authorities  should be 
transparent about losses to taxpayers and recoveries (Moretti, Chavarri, and Dobler 2020). 
These principles and regulations provide a road map for some of the most important design 
decisions authorities face in planning capital injections. However, a review of our 23 AHCI 
and 36 BBCI case studies suggests nuances in that road map. In the BBCI sur vey, we 
emphasized that distinguishing between the goals of BBCI programs implemented during 
acute (“panic”) and chronic (“debt overhang”) phases of a crisis is crucial. In an acute phase, 
we found that BBCI programs should be designed to influence the behavior of bank 
counterparties, while in chronic phases, the focus should be on bank behavior itself. We 
observed some parallels with this distinction in the ad hoc cases, but with acute and chronic 
defined at the entity level . When authorities are motivated by liquidity concerns —in the 
midst of a run or in fear of one —we consider that  an acute-phase intervention, even if the 
overall financial system is not in danger . On the other hand, when authorities are worried 
more about long -run viability than short -term liquidity, we consider that to be a  chronic-
phase intervention.   
We identified several themes to guide capital injection program design in the BBCI survey 
and provided many illustrative examples for the policymaker’s tool kit. The lessons from our 
BBCI survey that overlap with this AHCI survey include ensuring that: (1) the size of a capital 
injection be “large enough ” to solve the problem without need for further injections ; ( 2) 
capital injection s be combined with other interventions; ( 3) entities beware of legal  or 
regulatory constraints on program implementation; ( 4) the exit plan fits the investment 
type; and ( 5) in the acute phase , higher-tier capital is better . These themes were 
strengthened by our analysis of the 23 AHCI cases.  
5
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 8 ---
Additionally, our survey on restructuring and resolution drew lessons from 19 case studies 
of bank resolutions, 10 of which included recapitalizations  (McNamara et al. 2024) . These 
lessons were: (1) the need for resolution and restructuring to eliminate uncertainty about 
an institution’s solvency by closing it, recapitalizing it, or merging it with a healthier 
institution; (2) the importance of effective valuation in achieving this result; (3) the necessity 
of cla rity in the treatment of creditors; and ( 4) the value of a credible bail -in tool to 
incentivize creditors to agree to solutions outside resolution. This survey provides further 
evidence of these themes. 
Although capital injections can be costly, both financially and politically, authorities often 
find that they are necessary to protect depositors and prevent financial contagion. 
Authorities should be aware of regulatory constraints on program implementation. This was 
especially true for AHCI cases in terms of writing down or bailing in existing stakeholders as 
a condition for capital injection. As emphasized in the BBCI survey, policymakers are 
encouraged to address as many of these problems as possible through legislation passed  in 
quieter times before a cr isis occurs , allowing for emergency authority to be utilized 
efficiently. With this overarching recommendation, we list and discuss four themes for 
institutions contemplating an ad hoc capital injection program.  
The major challenge  in making capital injection s is balancing the tension  between 
financial stability measures and the political backlash and moral hazard they 
engender. Moral hazard concerns often drive punitive ex  ante conditions  for capital 
injections; yet, financial stability conce rns, focused on the spillover effects of a large bank 
failure on individuals and markets, should outweigh  moral hazard  concerns in the acute 
phase of a financial crisis. Authorities should instead  address the political backlash and 
moral hazard concerns wi th tough measures such as bail-in—imposing losses on 
shareholders and creditors —and discipline for management, including through legal 
channels if laws are broken. But authorities often balk at such measures in the depth s of a 
crisis. Especially for bail-ins, even with appropriate legal authority, clarity and consistency 
are important factors in implementing the bail -in or write -down of existing stakeholders. 
Unexpected losses imposed on stakeholders can lead to panic in the wider market and 
multiple lawsuits against the state by stakeholders seeking compensation.  
In contrast, in a chronic situation, there may be less concern that such a surprise could spook 
investors, and authorities may be more able to impose punitive outcomes on stakeholders.  
Even in cases where substantial taxpayer losses are unavoidable, authorities can use various 
tools to enable taxpayers to share some upside from a capital injection. This can be done by 
ensuring the state holds equity or warrants in a bank as it attempts to recover. Tax payers 
can also be protected through strong oversight of the bank after the capital injection. In the 
US AHCI cases for Citi and BofA, the law authorizing capital injection required authorities to 
acquire warrants for the right to receive nonvoting common shares or preferred shares of 
the financial institution for the benefit of taxpayers.  
Combining capital injections with other interventions is good practice.  Combining 
other programs with a capital injection can be a useful force multiplier , as we noted i n the 
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
BBCI survey . Fourteen of the 23 cases we studied also included guarantee programs (as 
noted in Key Design Decision No. 2, Part of a Package). The type of guarantee varies 
depending on the failing bank’s situation. Guaranteeing a bank’s liabilities may help stem 
runs by anxious creditors and depositors, but it may not convince anyone that the bank itself 
is solvent. For that reason, in many cases, governments have also guaranteed a bank’s assets, 
capping the potential for further credit or other losses.  
Exit plans are important, and capital design can help with the exit. From the start of the 
capital injections , authorities generally intend to reprivatize their investments as soon as 
possible. Principles and regulations around recapitaliz ation also emphasize the temporary 
nature of the government support through capital injection. Also, as we noted in the BBCI 
survey, the absence of a feasible exit plan can lead to higher costs, both politically and 
economically.  
Key Design Decision No. 8 , Capital Characteristics, and Key Design Decision No. 15, Exit 
Strategy, discuss examples helpful in accomplishing the exit.  
Governments may face constraints that render conventional cash -based 
recapitalizations difficult. Using government bonds in such instances can work , 
provided that the sovereign has stable credit status. These bond-based recapitalizations 
were a common practice in financial crises before 2000 (Andrews 2003), although we noted 
in our own survey on BBCI programs that they have been less common since the GFC (Rhee 
et al. 2022). Governments may choose bond-based recapitalizations because their domestic 
bond markets are relatively undeveloped, but even countries with developed markets have 
chosen this path because of the technical or political constraints associated with financing  
recapitalizations. Of course, injecting cash is typically preferred to issuing government debt 
in return for new bank capital in a jurisdiction where the sovereign debt rating has become 
unstable. In those instances, q uickly deteriorating or questionable value of government 
bonds may further strain the bank’s viability. Key Design Decision No. 9, Size and Source of 
Funding, discusses the issue in further detail.   
The remaining sections of this pape r go through the specific Key Design Decisions in detail. 
As we did in the BBCI survey, we note at the outset of this analysis that most of these design 
decisions were made in real time, often during the most acute phases of a crisis. In almost all 
cases, the legal background for the programs was either new or untested, and many mistakes 
were made because of this time pressure and novelty. In recent years, most countries with 
significant banking systems have improved their legal frameworks around bank resolutions 
to limit the need for official recapitalizations and to tightly circumscribe the conditions of 
their use. The global regulatory community has also reached a consensus about the need for 
large banks and other financial institutions to maintain plans for their own resolution, 
overseen by their regulators or resolution authorities. The survey allows for a more nuanced 
approach to those principles and regulations depending on the situation a policymaker is 
facing. A metatheme of much of the work of the Y ale Program on Financial Stability  is that 
program design could be significantly improved if policymakers worked out some of these 
details in advance. 
7
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 10 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: What was the policymaker’s justification and goal  for the  capital 
injection to the institution? 
All cases in our survey can largely be divided into having two objectives. One is a capital 
injection to a distressed financial institution to prevent it from becoming nonviable, and the 
other is a capital inj ection to rebuild  the institution  for longer-term viability  as a private 
concern. The former objective can also vary from a truly preemptive intervention to prevent 
imminent bankruptcy of the institution, and the goal is to address bank counterparties. Both 
objectives accompany an emphasis from the policymaker on the systemic importance of the 
institution to the banking sector, financial system, and the entire economy.  
Ultimately, recapitalization should be for viable institutions regardless of the purpose of the 
intervention. For nonviable institutions, authorities should choose resolution, restructuring, 
or if there is a compelling national interest, nationalization. However, determining viability 
is a challenge during a financial crisis, and authorities can’t always make the right call. The 
resolution of Dunfermline Building Society is an example of a case in which the authorities 
ultimately decided not to inject capital, after balancing the option s of recapitalization and 
resolution. When the official stress tests did not persuade policymakers that the institution 
would be able to service the interest on its injected capital or repay it, they elected to put the 
institution through special resolution under its banking law (Makhija 2024d). In contrast, in 
the Laiki case in Cyprus , although the government’s decision to recapitalize the bank was 
based on a viability assessment, a later study shows that this assessment was in error , and 
the European Central Bank (ECB) further criticized the Cypriot authorities for recapitalizing 
a nonviable ba nk. The ECB recommended instead using resolution tools  (Schaefer-Brown 
2024a). In the MPS case in Italy, an academic has argued that the bank should not have been 
eligible for public recapitalization based on its failing to meet long -term viability criteria 
under BRRD and Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) rules (Hoffner 2024a). 
Sometimes, policymakers choose capital injection because of the downs ide of other 
intervention options. In the case of Austria’s HAA, when it turned out that the bank needed 
further capital after the first injection, instead of resolution, the policymakers decided to go 
ahead with a second injection leading to nationalizati on as there were no suitable laws to 
deal with the bank’s bankruptcy at that time. In addition , the policymakers had several 
concerns about bankruptcy since the bank had a guarantee from a small Austrian state and 
bankruptcy of the bank would have in turn bankrupted this state. Further, the bank had a 
substantial presence in Central, Eastern, and Southeastern European countries, all of which 
were facing deteriorating economic situations at that time and receiving or in the process of 
negotiating support from the IMF, the European Commission (EC), and the World Bank. The 
bank’s bankruptcy not only would have further negatively impacted these countries but also 
would have led the regulators in these countries to ring -fence certain assets of the bank , 
causing its overall asset value to deteriorate. Other Austrian banks with a major presence in 
these countries may also have been negatively impacted by association (Decker 2024a). 
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
In the case of Germany ’s HSH, the authorities had similar concerns to HAA , where a 
resolution would have bankrupted  a regional government because of the guarantee it was 
providing to the bank. Thus, the authorities decided to inject capital.     
2. Part of a Package: Did the policymakers announce the capital injection alongside 
other interventions? Were there any intervention programs existing when the 
capital injection took place? 
All the instances of ad hoc capital injection we studied accompanied other intervention tools. 
In many instances, policymakers had already provided emergency liquidity. Switzerland’s 
Volksbank, Spain’s CCM, and Korea ’s KFB and SB all had received liquidity, but losses 
continued to increase , and authorities had to inject capital. In Russia’s Otkritie, the central 
bank provided liquidity enabling the ba nk to stay operational before receiving capital 
injections. Fourteen of the cases had a guarantee accompanying the capital injection. There 
were three instances of using moratorium to stop runs in addition to capital injection. Nine 
of our cases were open-bank transactions, in which the government never had to resolve the 
institution. All of the other AHCI cases accompanied or resulted in the resolution or 
restructuring of the institution. In 11 of the 23 cases surveyed, the authorities ultimately put 
the financial institution receiving the aid into resolution. In 12 cases, the authorities found 
private sector buyers. In Otkritie, a state bank bought the authorities’ stake in the bank. In 
all of these cases, the government declared its intent to reprivatize as soon as possible. Figure 
2 lists different combinations of policy measures in operation with the AHCI. 
  
9
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 2: Other Policy Measures with Capital Injection  
Case Name Emergency 
Liquidity 
Assistance 
Guarantee Resolution 
and 
Restructuring 
Other Programs 
Austria and Germany, HAA ✓ Account, 
asset, debt ✓  
Belgium and France, Dexia ✓ Debt ✓  
Belgium, Fortis ✓  ✓  
Cyprus, Laiki ✓  ✓  
France, Bank of France    Moratorium 
Germany, HSH  Asset, debt   
Germany, IKB ✓ Asset, debt   
Greece, ATE ✓ Debt ✓  
Greece, Piraeus     
Iceland ✓ Account ✓  
India, Yes Bank ✓  ✓ Moratorium 
Italy, MPS ✓ Debt   
Japan, NCB ✓  ✓  
Korea, KFB and SB ✓ Debt ✓  
Latvia, Parex ✓ Debt ✓ Moratorium 
Netherlands, SNS Reaal ✓ Debt ✓  
Portugal, BES (Novo Banco)   ✓  
Russia, Otkritie ✓  ✓  
Spain, CCM ✓ Asset ✓  
Switzerland, Volksbank ✓    
Switzerland, UBS ✓ Account   
US, BofA ✓ Account, 
asset, debt   
US, Citi ✓ Account, 
asset, debt   
Source: Authors’ compilation. 
As studied in the BBCI survey, bank restructuring  and asset and debt guarantees  are 
complementary to recapitalization  in AHCI . While capital injections are the most direct 
method to solve an undercapitalization problem , they are  both fiscally and politically 
expensive. A guarantee program, on the other hand, incurs only contingent liabilities for the 
government, and the absence of immediate outlays can make it politically more palatable.  
Of course, the motivation for gua ranteeing a bank’s liabilities (accounts or other debt) may 
differ from the motivation for guaranteeing its assets. A liability guarantee may address a 
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
liquidity problem but not a solvency problem. In other words, it may convince liability 
holders not to run, but it may not persuade anyone that the bank itself is solvent. Ten cases 
included liability guarantees; four of those also had asset guarantees; and two cases had only 
asset guarantees. In the HSH case, the authorities, after guaranteeing banking debt , created 
a model for interventions to ensure the bank could meet its regulatory capital requirement 
while minimizing the budgetary impact  by combining a  capital injection and an asset 
guarantee to reduce the bank’s risk-weighted assets (Makhija 2024a). 
Similarly, during the Global Financial Crisis, the US bank deposit insurer, the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC), guaranteed senior debt and transaction accounts for all banks 
to stop widespread runs , and the Treasury injected capital into all of the largest banks, 
including Citi. However, market concerns continued to focus on the low quality of Citi’s assets 
and the threat to its solvency. In response, the authorities constructed a package that 
consisted of both a second round of public  sector capital and an asset guarantee.  Under the 
asset guarantee, the government and central bank would share in the losses on a large pool 
of distressed assets if those losses proved to be catastrophic. The authorities later negotiated 
a similar deal for BofA, a s market concerns similarly focused on the quality of assets at 
Merrill Lynch, the investment bank that BofA had just acquired with the government’s 
blessing. As it turned out, this effort still wasn’t sufficient to restore confidence  in major US 
banks. The authorities later ran the largest banks, including Citi and BofA, through a stress 
test and swapped some of their capital for higher-quality common equity to further reassure 
market participants of the banks’ solvency. 
3. Legal Authority: What was the legal basis that the authorities relied on? Was there 
a need for new law, or could they rely on existing authority? For E uropean Union 
member countries, what extra European Commission approval did they require? 
As we found in the BBCI survey, many jurisdictions required a new regulatory framework to 
inject capital into the institutions  in the ad hoc cases studied . In 15 cases, the capital 
injections relied on  new legal regimes . This meant that some authorities needed to be 
creative in stretching existing regimes to find a basis for a timely capital injection.  
In the UBS case, Switzerland relied on an interpretation of existing government authority to 
issue ordinances to protect the country ’s foreign relations and security , and the Swiss 
Parliament approved the capital injection retroactively  (Makhija 2024c). The government 
reasoned that without intervention , UBS’s failure would bring civil disturbance and 
reputational damage to the Swiss financial market. However, subsequent legal analysis has 
noted that this authority was intended only for such extraordinary and unforeseeab le 
situations as natural disasters, epidemics, and military threats, and although the collapse of 
a major bank would have led to some civil disturbance, the prevention of the collapse was 
likely an insufficient basis to issue the ordinance.  Therefore, with out the retroactive 
parliamentary approval, the repercussions the government would have faced are unclear.
 
11
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 14 ---
4. Administration: Which authority was in charge of  establishing and operating the 
capital injection? 
Typically, the fiscal authority has taken the lea d in establishing and administering the 
recapitalization of financial institutions. This is consistent with our observation in the BBCI 
survey and the recommendation by the IMF in managing a systemic banking crisis. The IMF 
notes that o wnership interests i n banks after recapitalization should be with the finance 
ministry or a specialized agency. It further states that central banks, other supervisors, and 
deposit insurers are inadequate. This is because they have conflict s of interest as owners of 
the banks, and the ownership can  undermine the credibility and balance sheets of central 
banks or deposit insurers  (Moretti, Chavarri, and Dobler 2020).  Often, in our AHCI cases,  
when the fiscal authority took the lead, central banks and other supervisory and regul atory 
agencies assisted in the operations. Figure 3 lists the main operators in our 23 AHCI cases. 
Figure 3: Administrator Responsible for Capital Injection Operations 
Case Name Administrator 
Austria and Germany, HAA Special entity (FIMBAG)a  
Belgium and France, Dexia Special entity (SFPI)b 
Belgium, Fortis Special entity (SFPI)b 
Cyprus, Laiki Government 
France, Bank of France Government 
Germany, HSH Government 
Germany, IKB State-owned development bank 
Greece, ATE Government 
Greece, Piraeus Special entity (HFSF)c 
Iceland Government and supervisor 
India, Yes Bank Central bank 
Italy, MPS Government 
Japan, NCB Government 
Korea, KFB and SB Central bank and deposit insurer 
Latvia, Parex Government and special entity (LPA)d  
Netherlands, SNS Reaal Government 
Portugal, BES (Novo Banco) Special entity (resolution fund) 
Russia, Otkritie Central bank 
Spain, CCM Deposit insurer 
Switzerland, Volksbank Government 
Switzerland, UBS Government 
US, BofA Government 
US, Citi Government 
(a) FIMBAG: subsidiary of Austria’s sovereign wealth fund. 
(b) SFPI: Federal Participation and Investment Company, a quasi -private entity, under the direction of the 
Belgian government (with support of French and Luxembourgish authorities, as applicable). 
(c) HFSF: Hellenic Financial Stability Fund. 
(d) LPA: Latvian Privatization Agency.  
Source: Authors’ compilation. 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
The central bank or the deposit insurer has taken the lead in a smaller number of cases.  In 
the case of Yes Bank in India, the central bank coordinated and administered the capital 
injection by a consortium of banks  (Gupta 2024) . For Russia’s Otkritie, the central bank 
formed a special vehicle to administer the capital injection, and all ownership rights were 
exercised with approval from the central bank  (Hoffner 2024b). In the case of Japan’s NCB, 
the central bank administered the capital injection , and the Ministry of Finance was 
unofficially involved in coordinating any private consorti um efforts (Heaphy 2024). In the 
KFB and SB case, the central bank originally administered the capital injection, but then later 
the deposit insurer took over the role  (Park and Heaphy 2024) . The deposit  insurer fully 
administered the capital injection in the case of Spain’s CCM (Swaminathan 2024).  
5. Governance: Were any bodies overseeing the administration of capital injection? 
Were there requirements to report to a legislative body? 
We discussed in the BBCI survey that in devising governance arrangements, authorities must 
pay attention to both the operational efficiency of the program and the public perception of 
its fairness. The most common form of governance was the regular reporting obligation to 
the parliament . In the case of KFB and SB , Korea  had crea ted t he Public Fund Oversight 
Committee to oversee the recovery of the funds, and authorities were mandated to regularly 
disclose on how the funds injected to KFB and SB were being managed  (Park and Heaphy 
2024). EU countries’ programs have an obligation to report to  the EC on the operations of 
the program , and for certain cases, the EC assigns a monitoring trustee to oversee the 
operations.  
6. Communication and Disclosure: How did the government communicate the goals 
of the program? Were there any special communication issues? 
Policymakers strive to quickly reinstall confidence in the banks and the financial system  
through the announcement of capital injections. Successful communications are clear about 
the goals of the program, send consistent messages, and portray the authorities as competent 
and decisive (Rhee et al. 2022). Any sudden change in the plans of the authorities will cause 
confusion. In Otkritie’s case, Russia’s central bank initially announced that the creditors of 
the bank would not be bailed in, but the next day, the central bank flipped the decision, saying 
it may implement a bail-in depending on the bank’s capital level.   
A leak that a bank may be receiving a capital injection before an official communication by 
the policymakers can worsen the financial situation of the bank. When the n ews of 
Volksbank’s difficulties and bailout had leaked a day before Swiss policymakers announced 
the capital injection, Volksba nk’s liquidity drained in the following days as worried 
depositors withdrew their savings . The federal loan office  and the central bank had to 
provide emergency loans to bridge payment difficulties until the  capital injection was 
completed (Makhija 2024b). 
In Korea, the letter of intent sent to the IMF by the central bank and the Ministry of Finance 
stated that “[t]wo commercial banks in distress are required to prepare a plan, in about two 
months, to meet the Base l capital standards within four months afte r approval of the plan”  
13
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 16 ---
(IMF 1997). When the letter was disclosed, which is standard practice for the IMF, 
speculation that the two banks unnamed in the letter were KFB and SB grew and caused a 
massive run on both banks (Park and Heaphy 2024).  
7. Treatment of Creditors and Equity Holders: How were the claims of creditors and 
equity holders treated during capital injection?  
Thirteen of our AHCI cases included the practice of imposing losses on certain stakeholders 
of the bank.  Of those, 10 required banks’ equity shareholders to absorb losses before the 
government capital injection; eight imposed losses on subordinated debt or preferred 
shareholders; and one (L aiki) imposed losses on uninsured depositors.  In contrast, 
participation in most of the BBCI programs we examined in our earlier survey was voluntary 
and, for that reason, did not impose losses on stakeholders; a minority of those programs 
were mandatory and did impose losses at least on equity shareholders. As in the context of 
the resolution, how to deal with an institution’s loss is a major question for AHCI. This section 
will have many interconnected discussions with McNamara et al. (2024), a survey on 
resolution and restructuring. Figure 4 shows on whom the losses were imposed for each 
case.  
  
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 4: Imposition of Losses on Stakeholders 
Case Name Bail-in 
Austria and Germany, HAA Equity holders  
Belgium and France, Dexia None 
Belgium, Fortis None 
Cyprus, Laiki Equity holders, bondholders, uninsured 
depositors 
France, Bank of France None 
Germany, HSH None 
Germany, IKB None 
Greece, ATE None 
Greece, Piraeus Noteholders 
Iceland Equity holders, bondholders 
India, Yes Bank Equity holders, AT1 bondholders 
Italy, MPS Subordinated bondholders  
Japan, NCB Equity holders 
Korea, KFB and SB Equity holders 
Latvia, Parex Equity holders 
Netherlands, SNS Reaal Equity holders, subordinated bondholders 
Portugal, BES (Novo Banco) Equity holders, subordinated bondholders, 
senior bondholders 
Russia, Otkritie Subordinated bondholders 
Spain, CCM None 
Switzerland, Volksbank Cooperative shareholders 
Switzerland, UBS None 
US, BofA None 
US, Citi None 
Source: Authors’ compilation. 
Although many discussions around bail -ins and loss-sharing seem recent, o ur cases show 
that this practice existed in 1933 with Volksbank and during the 1990s in Korea and Japan.  
The IMF, in a 2020 report on lessons learned from managing systemic banking crises,  
recommended that before recapitalizing a bank with public funds , the losses of the bank  
must first be recognized . This requirement prevents public funds from bailing out equity 
shareholders, who are intended to absorb losses when a firm becomes troubled  (Moretti, 
Chavarri, and Dobler 2020). Imposing losses on these stakeholders is based on the principle 
that the costs of bank failures are shifted to where they best belong. This approach is also to 
replace the public subsidy with private penalty or with private insurance forcing banks to 
internalize the cost of risks they assume (Goodhart and Avgouleas 2015). 
This practice of burden sharing by equity shareholders is further supported by the European 
Commission in the case s of Austria’s HAA, Latvia’s Parex, and Germany’s HSH. The 
Commission emphasized sufficient bail-in reflecting the true losses of the bank in approving 
15
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 18 ---
capital injections under the State Aid rules . Authorities in the HSH case had not imposed 
losses on the existing shareholders  before the capital injection , and the Commission 
disagreed with this practice, arguing the owners should have been completely diluted before 
the injection. It took two years for t he Commission to deliberate on the State Aid decision, 
and in its final decision, it required the bank to pay an additional EUR 500 million in shares 
to the authorities . Following this final  decision, the bank’s shareholders appealed for an 
annulment of the decision in the EU General Court. However, the General Court dismissed 
the appeal since the Commission’s decision created proper burden sharing (Makhija 2024a). 
Burden sharing can also affect stakeholders beyond equity shareholders. Eight cases 
imposed losses on preferred shareholders or subordinated debt holders. T he Commission 
criticized Spanish authorities in the CCM case for allowing remuneration for certain hybrid  
capital holders. CCM called two previously issued preference shares at par value after the 
capital injection despite the absence of distributable profits. Also, CCM  had made 
discretionary coupon payments on hybrid capital although it was incurring losses in the 
previous year (Swaminathan 2024). The EC noted that this was inconsistent with its policies 
on hybrid instruments and its principles on burden  sharing since the c reditors were not 
made to bear any of the losses . This was despite  CCM having no legal obligation to do this 
and the central bank having the right to bail in the debt before any recapitalization of the 
entity (Santos 2017). 
In the case of Cyprus’s Laiki, policymakers called for voluntary bail-in through exchange of 
perpetual subordinated debt and subordinated bonds , respectively,  into new ordinary 
shares and new subordinated bonds with a discount. This approach was criticized for not 
being aggressive enough  (Schaefer-Brown 2024a) . Dübel (2013) asserts that Laiki would 
have had more of a risk buffer if it had written down shareholders and hybrid capital owners 
to zero and turned subordinated bond investors into co -shareholders at the time of the 
government re capitalization. In addition , Dübel (2013) argues that by writing down  
uninsured depositors , policymakers could have protected themselves against losses . In 
2013, the government resolved Laiki , and most uninsured deposits  were bailed in as they  
remained in the legacy bank as it was liquidated over time . This, however, did undermine 
the confidence in the Cypriot banking sector (McNamara et al. 2024).  
In some instances, products intended to absorb losses end up in the wrong hands. In the MPS 
case in Italy, the recapitalization included the mandatory conversion of subordinated bonds 
into new equity shares. However, these subordinated bonds had been sold to retail investors 
before the bank got into trouble, and the authorities ultimately set up a fund to compensate 
for these retail investors after the write -down of all subordinated bonds  (Hoffner 2024a). 
Authorities may be also reluctant to impose losses on certain creditors because of the unique 
situations of the creditor. Initially, Austrian authorities did not allow any haircuts on HAA’s 
senior bonds guaranteed by one of its states, as losses on this state would have hurt Austria’s 
overall reputation as a borrower  (Decker 2024a) . Although this decision may have been 
appropriate in the moment, we note that it led to unintended consequences: the existing 
state guarantee subsequently tied the authorities’ hands in effectively deploying crisis -
fighting tools. When the authorities ultimately resolved the bank, the state guarantee 
complicated the resolution and incurred significant public costs (McNamara et al. 2024). In 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 19 ---
the Netherlands’ SNS Reaal case, authorities intentionally preserved the senior creditors of 
the bank to prevent rating downgrades of the bank and because of concerns around risks of 
negative impacts on the cost and stability of funding for the rest of the Dutch banking sector 
(George 2024e). However, shareholders and subordinated creditors were wiped out , and a 
large number of them brought lawsuits against the government. Eight years after the capital 
injection and the bail -in, the court ordered the government to provide compensation to 
certain subordinated creditors, and two years after the court order, the government started 
a compensation scheme. 
Ex ante, having the bail -in regime in place  is important , especially for nonequity 
stakeholders. Without appropriate legal authorities bestowed upon the policymakers, it 
took more than three months for Russian authorities in the Otkritie case  to write down 
subordinated creditors (Hoffner 2024b). Though initially stating that creditors would not be 
bailed in, the central bank decided to bail in subordinated debt holders as a prerequisite for 
recapitalization after the audit revealed a capital hole  larger than initially expected.  After 
failing to reach the necessary quorum in the shareholder meeting to approve this write-
down, the central  bank requested amendments to the bankruptcy law. Only after the 
amendment to the bankruptcy law could the authorities impose losses on the subordinated 
creditors and the existing shareholders. In the interim, as deposit outflows continued at the 
bank, the central bank had to provide significant liquidity, by placing deposits into the bank 
to enable the bank to meet its obligations as it awaited recapitalization. After the 
recapitalization, the bank was able to repay this deposit from the central bank in 2018. 
Additionally, clarity and consistency are crucial , as observed in the restructuring and 
resolution survey. Any unexpected actions by the authorities resulting in unexpected losses 
to stakeholders can trigger lawsuits and create uncertainty for other s and related markets, 
further destabilizing the financial system. In the case of Portugal ’s BES (Novo Banco), the 
authorities relied on the public interest clause to override the contractual claims of some 
senior bondholders. The authorities retransferred these senior bondholders back to the bad 
bank so that it could impose larger losses and lower the cost to the government  (Gupta and 
Brandon 2024). However, this led to lawsuits and uncertainty in the senior unsecured debt 
markets, as investors became concerned that their debt may also become bail-in-able. The 
resolution and restructuring survey include d the most recent example of Credit Suisse  in 
2023, which further emphasized the importance of clarity and consistency. The authorities 
in Credit Suisse wrote down additional Tier 1 (AT1) bondholders before the equity holders. 
Although the terms of the AT1 bonds included such a possibility, the exact process used was 
surprising to many market participants.  Immediately, lawsuits were brought by those AT1 
bondholders suffering losses. Also, regardless that the AT1 bonds allowing for such write -
down were unique to Credit Suisse, other institutions’ AT1 bondholders suddenly became 
worried about the possible treatment of their holdings, and the market temporarily came to 
a halt (McNamara et al. 2024).  
In the Yes Bank case, although India’s authorities had not included in the press release of the 
bank’s recapitalization its plans to write down AT1 bondholders, the central bank did so. It 
also wrote  down only certain AT1 bon dholders for undisclosed reasons . The AT1 
bondholders who suffered losses brought a lawsuit, and India’s High Court ordered a stay on 
17
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 20 ---
the write-off of AT1 bonds. It reasoned that although the administrator of the bank had the 
legal authority to order a wri te-down of AT1 bonds, it did not obtain an approval from the 
Ministry of Finance, and only some AT1 bonds were written off without adequate reason. 
The government appealed, and the case is currently at India’s Supreme Court (Gupta 2024).  
On the other hand, Iceland negotiated agreements with creditors to avoid potential lawsuits 
from the write-down of EUR 28.1 billion owed to senior creditors, an amount that was twice 
Iceland’s 2007 GDP. Senior creditors received an average 29% recovery for their claims . 
Under the terms of their agreements with the authorities, creditors would receive 
compensation from contingent bonds if resolved assets turned out to be worth more than 
expected. They also received an exemption from capital controls, in return for agreeing not 
to bring a lawsuit against the government for their losses (George 2024d).  
8. Capital Characteristics:  What form of capital was injected? What other features 
did authorities use to allow taxpayers to share in potential losses or gains? 
Common shares with voting rights were the most popular form of capital injected by 
policymakers among the 23 AHCI cases we surveyed. Eighteen cases used common shares. 
Of the 18, six cases combined common shares with another form of capital. Figure 5 shows 
that preferred shares were less popular among the AHCI cases we surveyed. The BBCI 
programs we surveyed earlier were mostly voluntary, requiring the consent of common 
shareholders, and, for that reason, mostly involved the issuance of new preferred shares 
rather than common shares.  
  
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 5: Capital Characteristics 
Case Name Capital Characteristics  
 
Bail-in Common 
Shares 
Preferred 
Shares Other Capital 
Austria and Germany, HAA ✓  Participation capital ✓ 
Belgium and France, Dexia ✓    
Belgium, Fortis ✓    
Cyprus, Laiki ✓   ✓ 
France, Bank of France ✓    
Germany, HSH ✓    
Germany, IKB ✓  Loan with “better fortune” 
clause waiving repayment 
obligation 
 
Greece, ATE ✓    
Greece, Piraeus ✓  CoCos ✓ 
Iceland ✓  Subordinated debt ✓ 
India, Yes Bank ✓   ✓ 
Italy, MPS ✓   ✓ 
Japan, NCB ✓ ✓  ✓ 
Korea, KFB and SB ✓ 
Unknown 
for SB 
  ✓ 
Latvia, Parex ✓  Subordinated debt ✓ 
Netherlands, SNS Reaal ✓   ✓ 
Portugal, BES (Novo Banco) ✓   ✓ 
Russia, Otkritie ✓   ✓ 
Spain, CCM  ✓   
Switzerland, Volksbank   Cooperative capital ✓ 
Switzerland, UBS   Mandatory convertible notes  
US, BofA  ✓   
US, Citi  ✓ 
Converted to 
trust 
preferred 
  
Source: Authors’ compilation. 
In some cases, existing law shaped the decision on what form the injected capital would take. 
For example, as we saw in the BBCI survey, Austrian law stated that in recapitalization by 
the authorities, the capital injection was to be in participation capit al, which was an 
instrument in Austria to increase an institution’s core capital ratio and enhance risk-bearing 
19
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 22 ---
capacity but did not grant authorities any position or membership rights under corporation 
law. The preference for participation capital stemmed  from the banks’ influence on the 
writing of the law (Decker 2024a). In KFB, the government had initially planned to inject 
preferred shares . However, Korean commercial law prohibited the issuance of preferred 
stocks beyond 25% of any firm’s total outstanding capital. Thus, the maximum amount the 
government could have injected would have been less than the intended size of the capital 
injection. Therefore, the government provided the capital in ordinary shares (Park and 
Heaphy 2024).  
Overall, however, poli cymakers use security choice and shareholder rights to reinstate 
market confidence in the institution . In Volksbank, policymakers injected cooperative 
capital. The central bank initially recommended using preferred shares ranking above the 
existing coopera tive shareholders. The fiscal authority, however, was convinced that it 
should not create two types of capital with different seniorities, arguing this would create 
further public mistrust, especially after the existing share value had already been written  
down in half (Makhija 2024b). 
Common Shares 
In the case of Latvia ’s Parex, the policymakers  initially injected subordinate d loans but  
changed to common shares for subsequent capital injections after the subordinate d loans 
failed to stem the deposit run in the bank.  The IMF, after witnessing the injection of 
subordinated loans, had criticized that this was a misstep of the policymakers and it would 
not be enough to stem the run (Decker 2024b).  
In the instance of Citi in the US, the policymakers first injected preferred shares into the bank. 
As discussed in the BBCI survey, during the GFC, US policymakers chose preferred shares 
rather than common shares owing to concerns about  the political ramifications of a large 
government stake in a private bank ’s common equity. Additionally, policymakers reasoned 
that by avoiding market characterization of the bank as having been nationalized, they could 
maintain market confidence in the bank. Preferred shares also had other advant ages: (a) 
more seniority in the capital stack, resulting in higher protection of taxpayers in the event of 
liquidation; and (b) the payment of dividends by the bank to the government. However, 
policymakers later announced that they would exchange the preferred shares into trust 
preferred securities aimed at boosting the bank’s common equity. These securities were 
convertible into common equity . Since 1996, a portion of these securities satisfied Tier 1 
capital requirements  in the US  under the banking regulatory standards then in place . 
However, while regulators deemed them equity for regulatory capital, rating agencies rated 
them as debt instruments . Moreover, t he country’s deposit insurer had stated that in its 
experience, the holders of these securities had impeded recapitalizations or sales of troubled 
banks (Hoffner and Arnold 2024b). 
In chronic situations, we still witness more injection of common shares. This is because most 
of those banks in chronic situations are being resolved and restructured, and often 
authorities are the sole shareholders of the institution.  
20
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 23 ---
Other Features Attached to Noncommon Shares 
Some authorities attached specific features to qualify loans or other noncommon shares as 
Tier 1 capital, using mechanisms through which the government would share in the risk of 
losses. For example, the UBS case used m andatory convertible notes. These notes would 
automatically convert to ordinary shares 30 months after issuance , and this  mandatory 
conversion allowed the bank to count these notes as Tier 1 capital from the date of issuance. 
The bank, however, was required to pay the full coupon payment for the entire term. In a 
report to the Swiss Parliament, policymakers explained that these notes had the advantage 
of providing a fair and secure remuneration in the form of the coupon rate and allowed them 
to avoid becoming co-owners of the bank, so their participation in UBS ’s capital would not 
interfere with bank supervision (Makhija 2024c). 
Other cases used bespoke loss-sharing features. For example, in the case of Germany’s IKB, 
an official loan included an  immediate waiver of the bank’s obligation to repay unless the 
bank’s finances improved (“better fortune” clause ). The loan also included a waiver of 
regular interest payments  when the bank was incurring accounting losses. IKB’s regulator 
ruled that t hese waivers enabled t he loan to qualify as Tier 1 regulatory capital.  IKB also 
issued another form of hybrid capital called profit -participation certificates, the holders of 
which were entitled to dividends based on the performance of the issuing company . 
Payments out of future profits on obligations that used the better fortune clause would 
precede payments on these certificates (Swaminathan and Vala 2024). 
Alternatively, some programs used warrants to make it possible for taxpayers to s hare in a 
bank’s recover y. In Citi and BofA, the US law authorizing capital injection required 
authorities to acquire warrants for the right to receive nonvoting common shares or 
preferred shares of the financial institution for the benefit of taxpayers. Although it was not 
a condition of the capital injection, Swiss authorities also used warrants as a part of acquiring 
bad assets of UBS before the capital injection, for a similar purpose as with Citi and BofA.  
Capital Features to Promote Exit 
Some authorities used features of the capital design to incentivize banks to exit from the aid 
as soon as viable. In Piraeus, the European Commission stated that the use of contingent 
convertible (CoCo) bonds ensured the temporary nature of the aid  as it was repayable 
(Schaefer-Brown 2024c). The authorities in Piraeus injected 25% of the capital in common 
shares and 75% in CoCo bonds. On the other hand, i n CCM, the Commission criticized that 
the low interest rates and long term on preferred shares did not provide a sufficient incentive 
for the bank to repay the government for the capital injection. The preferred shares paid no 
interest during the first five years, and afterward, the interest rate was 3% until the 10th year 
(Swaminathan 2024).  
Capital Features to Encourage Private Investment 
In other cases, authorities used features of the official capital injection to encourage or 
require banks to raise private capital. In the BofA case, the authorities stipulated that the 
bank couldn’t repay the government for its AHCI unless the bank had first repaid its capital 
21
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 24 ---
received from the BBCI program, which the authorities had also provided —but the bank 
couldn’t repay the authorities for either program until it raised USD 25 billion in capital from 
private investors . In Piraeus, in order for the ban k to receive the capital injection, the 
authorities first required the bank to privately raise enough capital to satisfy the capital 
needs identified under the baseline scenario of a stress test by t he Single Supervisory 
Mechanism. After a successful priva te capital raising, the authorities injected the capital 
needs identified under the stressed scenario.  
9. Size and Source of Funding: What was the announced size of the capital injection? 
Did changing circumstances lead the authorities to increase it?  Where did the 
funding come from? Were the authorities providing cash or bonds in exchange for 
the capital? Were any private funds involved? What measures did authorities take 
to protect the provided funds and allow them to recoup their investments? 
In discussing broad-based programs, we noted that the overall size of the capital injection is 
influenced by whether the crisis is in an acute or chronic phase. We pointed out the risk of 
deploying too little capital in an acute phase , when the authorities ar e concerned about 
contagion through bank counterparties , although ultimately the size of the injection is 
limited by fiscal and political realities. We observed some parallels with this distinction in 
the ad hoc cases, but with acute and chronic defined at  the entity level. In the ad hoc cases, 
we witnessed the same concern around injection being too small in  the BES (Novo Banco), 
HAA, Parex, Laiki, NCB, Citi, BofA, and KFB and SB cases. In these cases, overoptimistic 
estimates and the continuous increase in the bank’s nonperforming loans (NPLs) were some 
of the reasons the size of initial injections was insufficient (Heaphy 2024; Park and Heaphy 
2024; Schaefer-Brown 2024a). 
We also witness ed that political realities influence the cal culation of the size of the capital 
injection in ad hoc capital injections. In ad hoc cases, the authorities often used stress tests, 
models, or audits to figure out the rough size of the injection. However, the calculations were 
not without fault. There w ere disagreements between the European Commission and 
national authorities in HSH and Laiki as to the size of the losses of the banks. In HSH, the 
Commission ended up ordering the bank to compensate further the authorities on the 
support they provided overall, and in Laiki, the bank ended up needing additional capital 
injection than initially calculated. In Greece’s Piraeus, the stress test by the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism was able to accurately calculate the capital needs of the bank 
without influence or conflict with national authorities. 
Generally, the funding for capital injection came from the fiscal authority, and the authorities 
could contribute cash or bonds, either tradable or nontradable , to the banks. However, KFB 
and SB initially used central bank funds and then moved on to deposit insurance funds. CCM 
used deposit insurance funds. The Otkritie and NCB cases used central bank funds.  
Others relied to some extent on funds from a public bank or consortium of private partie s. 
Yes Bank, BES (Novo Banco) , HAA, and IKB had a group of private banks funding part of the 
capital injection. The central bank coordinated the capital injection  from a consortium of 
banks in Yes Bank. BES (Novo Banco)’s funds came from the resolution fu nd that had been 
22
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 25 ---
funded by the state and a group of credit institutions. HAA had existing shareholders 
contributing additional funding to the capital injection until they were wiped out. IKB 
recapitalization was funded by a state-owned development bank , with half of the amount 
guaranteed by the federal government (Swaminathan and Vala 2024). 
What banks get in return for the issuance of capital is also important in signaling credible 
support. Governments sometimes issue bonds to troubled banks, rather than cash, to 
replenish their capital deficit. Injecting cash is considered preferable (Moretti, Chavarri, and 
Dobler 2020). However, various political or technical constraints may compel governments 
to issue bonds to recapitalize a distressed bank . Although we did not study the US Savings 
and Loan (S&L) crisis in this survey, in 1982, during that crisis, the US Congress was reluctant 
to take measures that would increase the budget deficit. As a compromise, it authorized the 
FDIC and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board to administer a temporary bond -based 
recapitalization program (Allardice et al. 1983). The FDIC invested in net worth certificates 
(NWCs) with participating banks in exchange for FDIC -insured promissory notes (FDIC 
1998, 23). The FDIC considered NWCs to be a form of regulatory capital , which r ecipients 
redeemed as they returned to profita bility by surrendering an equal portion of FDIC 
promissory notes. The recapitalization was essentially cashless, unless the recipient bank 
failed (US GAO 1984), and the program was largely considered successful (FDIC 1997, 230). 
Bond-based recapitalizations were a very common practice in financial crises before 2000 
(Andrews 2003), although we noted in our own survey on broad -based capital injections 
that they have been less common since the Global Financial Crisis (Rhee et al. 2022). Of 
course, this strate gy may not work for a country with a poor credit rating . The capital 
injection did not stop the depositor runs on Laiki Bank in Cyprus. Not only was the injection 
amount insufficient to absorb the continuing losses from Greek loans but also the ECB noted 
that the use of an unfunded sovereign bond from that country may not have been viewed as 
credible and that recapitalization by a government bond could create a feedback loop 
between the state and the bank . However, Cyprus may not have had a choice as it was not 
able to access funding markets after rating agencies downgraded its sovereign debt to non-
investment grade (Schaefer-Brown 2024a).  
When deviating from cash -based recapitalizations, governments should ensure t hat the 
terms and conditions of the bonds enable the bank to remain viable.  Bonds carrying an 
embedded sovereign credit risk or paying below -market rates may impede the recipient’s 
profitability and result in a prolonged and costlier resolution process (Andrews 2003). The 
IMF recommends that governments resorting to bond-based recapitalization make sure that: 
(a) interest rates are high enough for the recipient bank to remain profitable, (b) maturities 
are consistent with the expected recovery in the franch ise value of the bank , and ( c) the 
bonds are marketable and accepted by the central bank as collateral (Moretti, Chavarri, and 
Dobler 2020). 
10. Timing: Was the program timely? 
Delays in intervention can cause further erosion to the capital base of a bank by accelerating 
runs. In Otkritie, the capital injection took place over three months after the announcement, 
23
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 26 ---
in part due to the authorities having to wait for the legal amendments allowing for bail-in. In 
the meantime,  the central bank placed the Otkritie in temporary administration  and 
provided extensive liquidity support to meet continued deposit withdrawals before the 
recapitalization, after which the deposit outflow reversed (Hoffner 2024b). In UBS, although 
supervisors were monitoring the bank and knew of significant troubles in the bank, they did 
not notify the government as they were concerned about information on the troubles of the 
bank leaking. A lack of trust among authorities led them to not deal with the financial crisis 
for five months. After the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the situation 
at UBS deteriorated rapidly, and UBS officially requested aid from the Swiss government on 
October 14, 2008 (Makhija 2024c). 
In other cases, the authorities were able to respond in a timely manner. In the BofA case, 
authorities announc ed recapitalization in time for the bank’s disclosure of losses it  had 
incurred from a merger with a troubled bank (Hoffner and Arnold 2024a). 
Sometimes, capital injections took place after private capital-raising efforts failed (MPS, SNS 
Reaal, Laiki, UBS , Yes Bank ). In o ther cases , liquidity support, guarantees , and other 
measures proved insufficient , and the authorities chose to inject capital (ATE, Volksbank, 
IKB, HSH, KFB and SB). In the  cases of Citi and BofA, the broad-based capital injection they 
had received in late 2008 was not enough, and they received another ad hoc capital injection 
from the authorities (Hoffner and Arnold 2024a; Hoffner and Arnold 2024b).    
Some cases were chronic phase capital injections where there was enough time to perform 
a comprehensive assessment and stress tests on capital shortfalls. Also, the bank had enough 
time to  restructure and try private capital raising first. Piraeus was in this situation a nd 
raised enough from private investors to cover the capital needs under the baseline scenario 
of the stress test , and the authorities made up for the shortfall from the adverse scenario 
(Schaefer-Brown 2024c) . Authorities in HAA, Parex, IKB, Iceland, BES ( Novo Banco ), and 
CCM continued to or started to inject capital as the banks entered resolution.  
Compared to the BBCI cases, regulations around shareholder protection were not as large a 
hurdle in ad hoc cases. This may be because the assista nce was individually targeted and 
most firms were in absolute need of assistance at the time of capital injection or they ha d 
already gone through resolution when they reached the point of capital injection. In all of the 
AHCI cases, participation in the i nterventions was mandatory—the banks did not have 
another choice, and the government had decided it had the authority to require the company 
to accept the capital—whereas most of the BBCI programs were voluntary.  
11. Restructuring: What restructuring did the bank have to commit to as a condition 
of receiving capital injection? 
Similar to the BBCI programs, restructuring pave d the way toward long-term viability and 
was politically beneficial for ad hoc capital injection programs. More than half of the ad hoc 
capital injection cases required restructuring plans as a condition for receiving aid, mostly 
because of the  imposition of conditions by the European Commission. Conditions included 
divestment of en tire businesses (SNS  Reaal, NCB), disposal of selected portfolios  including 
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 27 ---
nonperforming loans and reduction of the size of a balance sheet (MPS, Volksbank, UBS, HSH, 
IKB, NCB, BES  [Novo Banco] ), and other c ost-cutting measures (reduction in operating 
expenses by cutting head count, branches, and other administrative expenses)  (MPS, 
Piraeus).  
12. Treatment of Board and Management: Was the board or management replaced as 
a condition of the capital injection? 
Replacing the board and management serves a similar purpose as restructuring the bank for 
long-term viability and political benefits. Some authorities forced the resignation of the 
board or management and appointed replacements (SNS Reaal, Yes Bank, Laiki, IKB, Iceland, 
BES [Novo Banco ], NCB). One  appointed a trustee to monitor the activities of the board 
(ATE), and another appointed a new board member to the existing board without replacing 
any of the old members (Piraeus). 
Volksbank had harsher requirements where a condition of the government’s capital injection 
was that the previous management of the bank should be examined and , if necessary, civil 
and criminal charges should be pursued against them  (Makhija 2024b). In other cases, the 
board resigned voluntarily (UBS, HSH, Fortis, Dexia, HAA, Parex) and waived compensation 
(UBS).  
In the US cases, the right to appoint directors to the board was contingent upon the banks’ 
payment of dividends on the preferred shares issued to the government. If the bank missed 
dividend payments for a total of six q uarterly dividend periods , the government could 
appoint two directors to the board.  
However, having the authorities appoint directors to the board may lead to some governance 
problems. In Korea’s SB, to improve the governance structure and mitigate moral hazard, the 
new board was structured so that outside directors outnumbered insiders, and an audit 
committee with a standing auditor was incorporated. However, filling the positions in the 
new board during a crisis proved difficult. SB lacked consistent management, having three 
interim CEOs and one regular CEO from 1997 to 2000. Some attest that while this structure 
may have alleviated the political concern around using public funds, it still was not enough  
to serve the functional needs of bank governance. Although the outside directors were well-
informed and committed, the policymakers who were the new shareholders did not take the 
board seriously, according to Kang (2003). Moreover, outside directors were not included in 
the discussion of the status of the bank in general or the timing of the sale, as shown in 
unsuccessful attempts to sell SB (Kang 2003). 
13. Other Conditions : Did recapitalization come with nonprice conditions  to 
incentivize the banks to exit the government support quickly? 
Nonprice conditions incentivize banks to exit quickly and can also be politically beneficial. 
Restrictions on compensation (SNS Reaal, MPS, UBS, HSH, HAA, Iceland, BES [Novo Banco]) 
and dividend payments (MPS, Laiki, Iceland, BES [Novo Banco]) were widely used nonprice 
conditions for the AHCI cases, as in the BBCI cases. Other conditions included restrictions on 
a bank’s business activities ( SNS Reaal, ATE, Laiki), making coupon payments (SNS Reaal, 
25
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 28 ---
MPS, Laiki), and advertising government support (SNS Reaal, BES [Novo Banco]) to ensure 
that a bank wasn’t taking advantage of government support to compete with other banks or 
take excessive risks.   
Compared to the EU countries, the US did not impose an up-front restriction but a 
requirement to obtain consent or approval for senior compensation plans and paying 
dividends. 
Owing to a unique situation of recapitalization by a consortium  of banks, in the Yes Bank 
case, the major nonprice co ndition was that each bank participating in the consortium had 
to hold at least 75% of its holdings for three years after the injection. No taxpayer funds were 
invested in this case, and perhaps the need for stability trumped a need for quick exit by the 
bank receiving the injection (Gupta 2024).  
14. Regulatory Relief : Did the authorities amend or grant exemptions from any 
existing regulations to assist smooth operation of the capital injection? 
For the BBCI programs, much of the focus of this section was on incentivizing participation 
in the program. Since the AHCI cases were  mandatory, such incentives  were not needed . 
Instead, our AHCI cases noted examples of authorities allowing for exemptions from the 
existing regulatory requirements to smooth the operations of the capital injection.  
In Yes Bank, the authorities granted exemptions for the banks participating in the capital 
injection from the capital gains tax on profits from the sale of shares after the lock-in period 
(Gupta 2024). Also, other common exemptions we saw were the continued operation of the 
bank during the capital injection, even if the regulatory capital ratio was breached (Yes Bank, 
Otkritie, Iceland’s three banks).   
15. Exit Strategy : Did the authorities have a plan to unload their investments once 
conditions normalized? Was the plan in place at the time of capital injection? 
Authorities generally prefer to exit the investments in AHCI programs as soon as possible . 
To achieve a successf ul exit, having a plan already in place at the start  is helpful . The 
European Commission often supports and emphasizes quick exits for the authorities. Having 
a goal date to privatize alone is often not enough. Many ad hoc cases showed that too often 
these goal dates  were passed (MPS, BES [Novo Banco], KFB  and SB) because of a  lack of 
interest from private institutions or  failed negotiations with private counterparties in the 
sale of shares authorities owned. In MPS, the authorities agreed to sell off their stake by the 
end of 2021, but as of November 2023, they still owned 39.2% of the bank (Hoffner 2024a). 
BES ( Novo Banco) received EUR 7.3 billion of capital injections over eight years, and the 
authorities were set to exit by the en d of 2016. However, they still had a 25% stake in the 
bank with a book value of EUR 1.1 billion as of 2023  (Gupta and Brandon 2024) . A more 
concrete premeditated plan is helpful, but the majority of our cases lack the plan. 
Interestingly, on the other hand , plans also need flexibility, and  having a goal date  could 
backfire under certain circumstances. In KFB's case, Korean authorities had set up a plan for 
privatization in advance with the preference to sell the bank as a whole, but if there were to 
26
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 29 ---
be a split sale, it had to be one buyer purchasing 50%+1 share so that the buyer would secure 
management rights while the authorities could maximize the opportunity of recovering 
taxpayers’ money. Amongst the two bidders they had for the bank, the authorities preferred 
one willing to purchase 50%+1 share instead of 80%. Moreover, the existence of a deadline 
for privatization created speculation that the government accepted the deal to meet the 
deadline set by the IMF . The deal provoked  a public outcry over “fire sale” privatization of 
the bank (Park and Heaphy 2024). While the structure of the exit plan was motivated by good 
goals, the political costs exceeded the benefits of such goals.  
At the time of our survey’s publication, governments still retained a stake in seven of the 
financial institutions profiled in our survey. 
Conclusion 
This paper surveys 15 Key Design Decisions for 23 ad hoc capital injection  cases. Our close 
examination of these cases  reinforces the themes of our earlier broad-based survey while 
also providing insights into the write -downs and bail -ins more common in the ad hoc 
examples.  
To be sure, capital injections can be costly, financially and politically. Nonetheless, 
authorities often find tha t they are necessary to protect depositors and prevent financial 
contagion. Countries with relatively robust supervisory and legal authorities are more likely 
to take successful preemptive actions to address poorly capitalized banks. Authorities 
should be aware of regulatory constraints on program implementation. These constraints 
are often far from the top of policymakers’ concerns but ignoring them can lead an otherwise 
well-designed program into unnecessary delays. Key Design Decision No. 3, Legal Authority, 
and Key Design Decision No. 10, Timing, discuss some examples. As emphasized in  our 
consideration of broad -based cases , policymakers are encouraged to address as many of 
these problems as possible through legislation passed in quieter times before a crisis occurs, 
allowing for emergency authority to be utilized efficiently.  
BBCI Themes Reinforced by Ad Hoc Capital Injection Cases 
The size of a capital injection must be “large enough” to solve the problem without the 
need for further injections. In the ad hoc cases, we witness ed the same concern around 
injection being too small in the BES (Novo Banco), HAA, Parex, Laiki, NCB, Citi, BofA, and KFB 
and SB cases. In these cases, overoptimistic estimates and the continuous increase in the 
bank’s NPLs were some of the reasons the size of initial injections was insufficient (Heaphy 
2024; Park and Heaphy 2024; Schaefer-Brown 2024a). 
Capital injections should be combined with other interventions. Similar to broad-based 
programs, combining other programs with a n ad hoc capital injection can be a useful force 
multiplier. Although capital injection is a powerful intervention tool, it is politically and 
fiscally expensive. As discussed above in Key Design Decision No. 2, Part of a Pac kage, 
guarantees can especially be a powerful force multiplier. Fourteen of the 23 ad hoc cases 
27
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 30 ---
included guarantee programs. The type of guarantee varies depending on the failing bank’s 
situation. Guaranteeing a bank’s liabilities may help stem runs by anx ious creditors and 
depositors, but it may not convince anyone that the bank itself is solvent. For that reason, in 
many cases , governments have also guaranteed a bank’s assets, capping the potential for 
further credit or other losses. In the HSH case, German authorities, after guaranteeing 
banking debt, combined a capital injection and an asset guarantee to reduce the bank’s risk-
weighted assets. The purpose was to ensure the bank met regulatory capital requirements 
while minimizing the budgetary impact of the injection. In the capital injection into Citi, US 
authorities constructed a package that consisted of both a second round of public  sector 
capital and an asset guarantee; they had already guaranteed all bank liabilities. This was in 
response to the market’s growing concern about the quality of Citi’s assets. 
Beware of legal or regulatory constraints on program implementation . In 15 of the 
AHCI cases, the capital injections relied on new legal regimes. This meant that some 
authorities needed to be creati ve in stretching existing regimes to find a basis for a timely 
capital injection. Swiss authorities in the UBS case relied on an interpretation of existing 
government authority to issue ordinances to protect Switzerland’s foreign relations and 
security, and the Swiss Parliament approved the capital injection retroactively . Subsequent 
legal analysis has shown that this interpretation was a stretch  (Makhija 2024c). Without 
appropriate legal authorities bestowed upon the policymakers, it took months for the  
authorities in the Otkritie case to write down subordinated creditors and shareholders, 
delaying the capital injection . In the interim, Russia’s central bank had to provide liquidity 
as the bank’s deposit outflows continued (Hoffner 2024b). 
Exit plans are important, and capital design can help with the exit . As we noted in the 
BBCI survey, the absence of a feasible exit plan can lead to higher costs, both politically and 
economically. Although almost all the authorities in the 23 AHCI cases we surveyed declared 
their intent to reprivatize as soon as possible, very few had a feasible exit plan.  In 11 of the 
23 cases surveyed, the authorities ultimately put the financial institution receiving capital 
injection into resolution. In 12 of the 23 cases, the authorities eventually found private sector 
buyers, including the banks that had gone through resolution . In the Otkritie case, a state 
bank bought the authorities’ stake in the bank. At the time of our survey’s publication, 
governments still retained a stake in seven of the financial institutions profiled in our survey.  
It may be easier to evaluate the up-front expense of capital injection to the taxpayers—cash 
invested in bank capital, for example —than to evaluate the ultimate net cost, including 
income from interest or dividends and from the ultimate sale of the stakes or other assets 
back to private investors. Asset values tend to gradually recover in the years after a crisis, 
allowing the authorities to recover at least a portion of their investment in a recapitalization. 
The US government made net profits of USD 4 billion from the USD 40 billion ad hoc capital 
injections it made to Citi and BofA in the AHCI cases we studied, when losses turned out to 
be far lower than experts fo recast at the height of the crisis.  The Swiss government 
recapitalized UBS for 6 billion  Swiss francs (CHF)  in December 2008 and by August 2009 
sold its stake for CHF 7.2 billion . Iceland’s rescue of three banks cost multiples of GDP up -
front, but by some measures, the government got all its money back, after imposing severe 
28
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 31 ---
losses on foreign creditors.  (These net cost estimates typically do not include opportunity 
costs.) 
Key Design Decision No. 8, Capital Characteristics, and Key Design Decision No. 15, E xit 
Strategy, discuss examples helpful in accomplishing the exit.  
In the acute phase, higher-tier capital is better . In the BBCI survey, we emphasize d that 
distinguishing between the goals of BBCI programs implemented during acute (“panic”) and 
chronic (“debt overhang”) phases of a crisis is crucial. In an acute phase, we found that BBCI 
programs should be designed to influence the behavior of bank counterparties, while in 
chronic phases, the focus should be on bank behavior itself. We observed some parallels with 
this distinction in the ad hoc cases, but with acute and chronic defined at the entity level . 
When authorities are motivated by liquidity concerns —in the midst of a run or in fear of 
one—we consider that  an acute-phase intervention, even if the overall financial system is 
not in danger. On the other hand, when authorities are worried more about long-run viability 
than short-term liquidity, we consider that to be a chronic -phase intervention. In the acute 
phase for ad hoc cases, the design of capi tal injection should aim to restore and maintain 
bank counterparties’ confidence. Authorities in the Parex and Citi cases changed the capital 
characteristics midway into those injections to have a higher tier and a simpler form after 
realizing that the markets were unsatisfied and that the runs continued with the initial form 
of injected capital. More examples are discussed in Key Design Decision No. 8, Capital 
Characteristics.   
New Themes from the Study of Ad Hoc Cases  
The major challenge in making capital injections is balancing the tension between 
financial stability measures and the political backlash and moral hazard they may 
engender. Moral hazard concerns often drive punitive ex  ante conditions for capital 
injections; yet, financial stability concer ns, focused on the spillover effect s of a large bank 
failure on individuals and markets, should outweigh  moral hazard  concerns in the acute 
phase of a financial crisis. Authorities should instead  address the political backlash and 
moral hazard concerns wit h tough measures such as bail-in—imposing losses on 
shareholders and creditors —and discipline for management, including through legal 
channels if laws are broken. But authorities often balk at such measures in the depth of a 
crisis. Especially in operating  bail-ins, even with appropriate legal authority, clarity and 
consistency are important factors in implementing the bail -in or write -down of existing 
stakeholders. Unexpected losses imposed on stakeholders can lead to panic in the wider 
market and multiple lawsuits a gainst the state by stakeholders seeking compensation. For 
example, the authorities in the Credit Suisse case in 2023 wrote down AT1 bondholders 
before equity holders. Although that outcome was clearly described in the AT1 bond  
documents, some bond holders immediately sued, believing they ranked senior to equity 
holders based on the traditional treatment of senior debt in the capital structure. Meanwhile, 
the broader AT1 market temporarily froze as investors in AT1 bonds issued by other 
institutions, which d id not have such terms, suddenly became worried they might receive 
similar treatment (McNamara et al. 2024). 
29
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 32 ---
In contrast, in a chronic situation, there may be less concern that such a surprise could spook 
investors, and authorities may be more able to impo se punitive outcomes on stakeholders. 
Iceland was able to design an agreement with the senior creditors of its failed large banks, 
while aggressively writing down the value of their holdings, to prevent them from bringing 
lawsuits against the state. Nevert heless, political obstacles remain in chronic situations as 
well, as seen in Italy’s MPS case where the bail-in-able instruments ended up in the hands of 
the retail investors. 
Governments may face constraints that render conventional cash -based 
recapitalizations difficult. Using government bonds in such circumstances  can work, 
provided that such bonds have stable sovereign credit status . Governments sometimes 
issue bonds to troubled banks to fill the holes on the asset side of bank balance sheets. These 
bond-based recapitalizations were a very common practice in financial crises before 2000 
(Andrews 2003), although we noted in our own survey on BBCI programs that they have 
been less common since the GFC (Rhee et al. 2022). Gove rnments may choose bond -based 
recapitalizations because their domestic bond markets are relatively undeveloped, but even 
countries with developed markets have chosen this path because of  political or technical 
limitations of financing cash -based capital in jections. Of cours e, injecting cash is typically 
preferred to issuing government debt in return for new bank capital in a jurisdiction where 
the sovereign debt rating has become unstable. For example, the capital injection did not 
stop the depositor runs o n Laiki Bank in Cyprus. The injection amount was clearly 
insufficient to absorb the continuing losses from Greek loans, but the ECB also noted that 
market participants may not have viewed the use of an unfunded sovereign bond as credible, 
considering that rating agencies had repeatedly downgraded Cyprus’s sovereign credit 
ratings. However, Cyprus also did not have a choice as it was strapped with cash owing to its 
inability to access the funding market. Key Design Decision No. 9, Size and Source of Funding, 
discusses the issue in further detail.  
  
30
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 33 ---
References  
Allardice, David, Herbert L. Baer, Elijah Brewer III, Thomas F. Cargill, John Dobra, Anne 
Marie Gonczy, George G. Kaufman, Robert D. Laurent, and Larry R. Mote. 1983. “The Garn-St 
Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic 
Perspectives, Vol. 7. March/April 1983.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4509/ 
Andrews, Michael. 2003. “Issuing Government Bonds to Finance Bank Recapitalization and 
Restructuring: Design Factors That Affect Banks’ Financial Performance.” In Bank 
Restructuring and Resolution, edited by David S. Hoelscher, 119–41. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan UK.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4346/ 
Decker, Bailey. 2024a. “Austria and Germany: Hypo Alpe Adria Capital Injection, 2008.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/2/ 
———. 2024b. “Latvia: Parex Bank Capital Injection, 2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 6,  
no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/16/ 
Dübel, Hans-Joachim. 2013. “The Capital Structure of Banks and Practice of Bank 
Restructuring: Eight Case Studies on Current Bank Restructurings in Europe.” Study 
commissioned by the Center for Financial Studies, University of Frankfurt, October 8, 2013.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2059/ 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 1997. History of the Eighties: Lessons for the 
Future. Vol. 1, An Examination of the Banking Crises of the 1980s and Early 1990s. Chapter 6: 
‘The Mutual Savings Bank Crisis.” Washington, DC: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4510/ 
———. 1998. Managing the Crisis: The FDIC and RTC Experience, Volume One: History. 
Washington, DC: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/8963/ 
Financial Stability Board. 2014. “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for 
Financial Institutions.” October 15, 2014. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/3739/ 
George, Ayodeji. 2024a. “Belgium and France: Dexia Group Capital Injection, 2008.” Journal 
of Financial Crises 6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/4/ 
———. 2024b. “Belgium: Fortis Group Capital Injection, 2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, 
no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/3/ 
31
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 34 ---
———. 2024c. “France: Bank of France Capital Injection, 1805.” Journal of Financial Crises 
6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/6/ 
———. 2024d. “Iceland: Arion Bank, Islandsbanki, and Landsbankinn Capital Injection, 
2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/11/ 
———. 2024e. “Netherlands: SNS Reaal Capital Injection, 2013.” Journal of Financial Crises 
6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/17/ 
Goodhart, Charles, and Emilios Avgouleas. 2015. “Chapter 11: A Critical Evaluation of Bail-
in as a Bank Recapitalization Mechanism.” In The New International Financial System: 
Analyzing the Cumulative Impact of Regulatory Reform, edited by Douglas D. Evanoff, 
Andrew G. Haldane, and George G. Kaufman, 267–305. Singapore: World Scientific 
Publishing Company.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4321 
Gupta, Salil. 2024. “India: Yes Bank Capital Injection, 2020.” Journal of Financial Crises 6,  
no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/12/ 
Gupta, Salil, and Shavonda Brandon. 2024. “Portugal: Banco Espírito Santo Capital 
Injection, 2014.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/18/ 
Heaphy, Owen. 2024. “Japan: Nippon Credit Bank Capital Injection, 1997.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/14/ 
Hoffner, Benjamin. 2024a. “Italy: Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena Capital Injection, 2017.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/13/ 
———. 2024b. “Russia: Otkritie Bank Capital Injection, 2017.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, 
no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/19/ 
Hoffner, Benjamin, and Vincient Arnold. 2024a. “United States: Bank of America Capital 
Injection, 2009.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/23/ 
———. 2024b. “United States: Citigroup Capital Injection, 2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 
6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/24/ 
32
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3

--- Page 35 ---
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 1997. “Republic of Korea: Letter of Intent of the 
Government of Korea.” December 3, 1997. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14862 
Kang, Chungwon. 2003. “From the Front Lines at Seoul Bank: Restructuring and 
Reprivatization.” IMF Working Paper No. 03/235, December 2003.  
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/1982 
Makhija, Anmol. 2024a. “Germany: HSH Nordbank Capital Injection, 2009.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/7/ 
———. 2024b. “Switzerland: Schweizerische Volksbank Capital Injection, 1933.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/21/ 
———. 2024c. “Switzerland: UBS Capital Injection, 2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 6,  
no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/22/ 
———. 2024d. “United Kingdom: Dunfermline Building Society Restructuring, 2009.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 1: 583–606. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss1/20/ 
McNamara, Christian M., Carey K. Mott, Salil Gupta, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 
2024. “Survey of Resolution and Restructuring in Europe, Pre- and Post-BRRD.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 6, no. 1: 1–34.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss1/1 
Metrick, Andrew, and Paul Schmelzing. 2024. “Banking-Crisis Interventions across Time 
and Space.” NBER Working Paper No. 29281, February 2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4322 
Moretti, Marina, Alvaro Piris Chavarri, and Marc C. Dobler. 2020. “Managing Systemic 
Banking Crises: New Lessons and Lessons Relearned.” IMF Departmental Paper No. 20/05, 
February 2020.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/10892/ 
Park, Jisoo, and Owen Heaphy. 2024. “Korea: Korea First Bank and Seoul Bank Capital 
Injection, 1997.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/15/ 
Rhee, June, Junko Oguri, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2022. “Broad-Based Capital 
Injection Programs.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 1: 1–48.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/1/ 
33
Survey of Ad Hoc Capital Injections Rhee et al.

--- Page 36 ---
Santos, Tano. 2017. “El Diluvio: The Spanish Banking Crisis, 2008-2012.” Columbia 
University and NBER, July 2017.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/750/ 
Schaefer-Brown, Stella. 2024a. “Cyprus: Laiki Bank Capital Injection, 2012.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 6, no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/5/ 
———. 2024b. “Greece: ATE Bank Capital Injection, 2011.” Journal of Financial Crises 6,  
no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/9/ 
———. 2024c. “Greece: Piraeus Bank Capital Injection, 2015.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, 
no. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/10/ 
Swaminathan, Lakshimi. 2024. “Spain: Caja de Ahorros Castilla–La Mancha Capital 
Injection, 2009.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/20/ 
Swaminathan, Lakshimi, and Rishi Vala. 2024. “Germany: IKB Deutsche Industriebank 
Capital Injection, 2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/8/ 
US Government Accountability Office (US GAO). 1984. “Net Worth Certificate Assistance 
Programs: Their Design, Major Differences, and Early Implementation.” GGD-85-8. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4511/ 
 
Copyright 2024 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
34
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3