--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 2 
2024 
Lessons Learned: Daniela Klingebiel Lessons Learned: Daniela Klingebiel 
Yasemin Sim Esmen 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic Policy Commons, Emergency and Disaster Management Commons, Finance 
and Financial Management Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, 
Theory, and Methods Commons, Public Affairs Commons, and the Public Policy Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Sim Esmen, Yasemin (2024) "Lessons Learned: Daniela Klingebiel," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 
2, 108-110. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1564 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/6 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss2/6

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Daniela Klingebiel 
By Yasemin Sim Esmen 
Daniela Klingebiel was principal portfolio manager with the World Bank’s Pension and 
Endowment Department, Hedge Funds , during the Global Financial Crisis. Throughout her 
career, s he has written many papers on financial crises, comparing various governments’ 
attempts to manage them and dissecting what has worked and why . This Lessons Learned 
summary is based on an interview with Klingebiel held on February 4 and March 3, 2021; the 
full transcript may be accessed here. 
When dealing with a financial crisis, it is very important for the government to signal 
to the markets what they should expect and to be consistent in its messages.  
In March 2008, the  United States  government had helped coordinate the sale of  failing 
investment bank Bear Ste arns to JPMorgan Chase for $2 per share with a $30 billion 
guarantee of its mortgage -backed securities from the Federal Reserve . According to 
Klingebiel, this sent a clear and credible message to the markets. By contrast, a few months 
later, when the government did not prevent the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers , another 
failing investment bank, confusion reigned, and this sparked a global contagion.  
She elaborated: 
During 2008, policymakers in the US further complicated and compounded the crisis 
by behaving inconsistently and adopting an initial piecemeal approach to solving or 
mitigating the crisis. (If you look at historical crises, this is what often happens. There 
often appears to be a period of denial of the extent of the crisis and the hope that the 
crisis can be contained by small measures.)   
So, a downgrade by one of the credit agencies of Bear Stearns’s mortgage-backed 
securities triggered a run on the bank. After initially saying that they would not 
intervene, policymakers stepped in with liquidity support and sold the bank to 
JPMorgan. This “bailout” seemed to suggest to market participants that  there is a  
lender of last resort or a provider of solvency of last resort and that they do not really 
have to be that concerned . . . .   
And then in September of the same year, the regulators and policymakers decided to 
allow Lehman to fail, suggesting that they simply lacked the right tools and 
mechanisms to prevent Lehman from going into bankruptcy. . . . 
If you looked at positioning, leverage, etc. —at any indicators —there was a lot of 
leverage in the system and financial products with significant implied leverage.  
Allowing Lehman to go bankrupt without providing initial support and guidance on 
what Lehman’s bankruptcy mean s for markets and other institutions led to a panic 
108

--- Page 4 ---
among market participants, given the importance of Lehman as credit counterparty 
and globally operating financial institution.  
Klingebiel posited (as have many others) that  the mixed signals resulting from the way the 
US government handled Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers  were a disaster . After that 
failure, said Klingebiel, US authorities became much smarter about addressing the financial 
crises more comprehensively and signaling to market participants that there was a backstop 
to the system.  
Providing longer -term fiscal s upport after a crisis m ay result in more equitable 
outcomes across injured parties.  
Klingebiel asserted that the outcomes of the GFC would have been more equitable if the US 
government had offered more help to individuals who suffered as a result of the crisis. This 
could have been achievable by not cutting back fiscal aid early. She noted: 
In the end, the government bailed out Wall Street and protected the financial 
institutions given thei r critical importance for a functioning economy. But, by not 
thinking through the support for those whose mortgages were underwater due to the 
significant fall in house prices, many people not only lost their houses but had to go 
into bankruptcy and sell t heir own homes at fire sale prices. From an equity 
perspective, they could have handled it a bit better. 
On fiscal policy, there is enough evidence now that suggests that the Obama 
administration and Congress should have been much more aggressive on supporting 
the economy through fiscal measures. They should not have cut back fiscal support 
so early, especially for those individuals that suffered the most because of the 
financial crisis. It took very long for the low -income, low-skilled workers to recover 
their losses.   
When creating a crisis response tool kit, seek to achieve a balance between flexible ad 
hoc processes that can be implemented with speed and dexterity and preestablished 
bureaucratic processes that are more rigid and seek to maintain fairness. 
Strong systems and an absence of corruption lead to a clear understanding of what can be 
done in a crisis and allow policymakers to move quickly to respond  to the crisis. Klingebiel 
advised that the cleaner the process, the lesser the influence, the cheaper the outcome. She 
also noted that while some may consider it optimal to design processes that will t reat all 
parties fairly, speed is also important when it comes to crisis resolution.  
From my expe rience, it is important to design a  clear and relatively simple process 
that determines which institutions are allowed to continue to operate and which will 
be closed. A clear and  transparent process which is based on objective valuations is 
also the best protection against pressure from politicians and influence groups. 
Klingebiel also pointed out that effective programs to battle financial crises require strong 
judicial and regulatory systems. When adopting policies for a specific country, she suggested 
109
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
thinking through what is available in that country in terms of talent, processes, systems, and 
the like to understand its needs and constraints while designing processes that are easy to 
understand and implement. 
Dated: July 2024 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2020-30 
110
Lessons Learned: Daniela Klingebiel Sim Esmen