--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 3 
2024 
Lessons Learned: Martín Redrado Lessons Learned: Martín Redrado 
Vincient Arnold 
Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, Public 
Administration Commons, and the Public Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Arnold, Vincient (2024) "Lessons Learned: Martín Redrado," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 3, 
615-616. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1597 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/29 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss3/29

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Martín Redrado 
By Vincient Arnold 
Martín Redrado was appointed president of the Central Bank of Argentina by President Néstor 
Kirchner in 2004 and oversaw measures to manage the external shocks of the Global Financial 
Crisis of 2007–09. He resigned in 2010 after President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner tried to 
remove him over a dispute regarding the use of the bank’s reserves to fund the government. 
After leaving the bank, Redrado authored the book No Reserve: The Limit of Absolute Power, 
which argues against the danger of mixing politics and economics. He is currently a director of 
the think tank Fundación Capital and most recently was named secretary for strategic affairs 
of the government of the city of Buenos Aires. This Lesson s Learned is based on an interview 
with Redrado held on April 14, 2023; the full transcript may be found here. 
Capital flows and the foreign exchange regime  can be both an impetus for financial 
crises and a constraint in central banks’ efforts to fight them. 
Redrado emphasized that, for an emerging market financial system, the direction and speed 
of capital flows and their resultant effects on the exchange rate often are the first and most 
severe forms of contagion in a crisis. Argentina’s modern history  with foreign exchange–
related crises began with the 1994 Mexican Peso Crisis, he said, in which Argentina suffered 
capital outflows for reasons unrelated to its own fundamentals but rather as a result of being 
regionally similar to Mexico (the so-called tequila effect). He explained:  
This was a typical example where capital outflows for external reasons ( [a] sudden 
increase in interest rates in the developed world) puts a strong pressure on exchange 
rates, particularly in countries that have an open capital acc ount. This problem was 
deepened with the Southeast Asia crisis in 1997. 
Later, in 2001, a sudden stop  in capital inflows resulted in a run on deposits during a 
devaluation of the Argentine peso. Six years later, in mid-2007, the first manifestations of the 
Global Financial Crisis came in the form of capital outflows. Redrado recalled that responding 
to the crisis meant a strong response to the effects of capital flows on the exchange rate to 
avoid bank runs. As he put it:  
[The] Central Bank accumulated precautionary foreign exchange reserves to cushion 
our economy from external shocks  . . . What we did at that point was to use all the 
instruments created through our anticyclical policies. As we encountered capital 
outflows, the Central Bank opened all the l evers of liquidity both in local and foreign 
currency. We used the futures markets, particularly to give predictability to market 
participants to hedge against volatility in the exchange rate. Overall, we set forth all 
the levers of liquidity through open market operations in all sorts of fixed income 
securities. In this way , the banking system had the capacity to respond to the 
demands of their clients, particularly when they withdrew deposits in dollars and or 
615

--- Page 4 ---
pesos, a typical response of the Argentine po pulation when they became aware of a 
financial crisis. 
Central bank swap lines can be an effective and flexible tool in responding to financial 
crises, both as a deterrent and as a backstop for the exchange rate regime. 
Redrado said he thought that central bank swap lines had a deterrent effect when facing a 
financial crisis: “Currency swaps among central banks have proven to be a strong deterrence 
against the spread of financial crisis around the world. ” The disclosure of Argentina’s 
functional cent ral bank swap line  with the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) had fast 
announcement effect, visible in markets almost instantly, he recalled:  
The effect on our local market was immediate as it was perceived as a sign of strength 
of the central bank, and therefore, capital outflows diminished and the pressure on 
the exchange rate decreased significantly. 
As a further market signaling effect, Redrado drew on the central bank’s swap line with the 
PBOC for 5% of the maximum allowed  but requested that the PBOC conv ert the resulting 
renminbi into US dollars to provide the market a clear signal that Argentina had access to 
foreign currency liquidity. Later, the ministry of finance utilized proceeds from the swap line 
to support the peso’s exchange rate in the context of abolished exchange rate controls. 
During the COVID-19 crisis, Argentina also used the swap line to obtain renminbi to pay for 
imports from China, helping to shelter its dollar reserves.  
Macroprudential policies put in place before a crisis can blunt the impact of a financial 
crisis when it develops.  
Although each crisis is different, smart macroprudential policies put in place before a crisis 
develops can help limit the damage, Redrado said. For example, lessons learned from the 
Global Financial Crisis laid the groundwork for macroprudential policies critical to stemming 
the damage in the COVID-19 crisis. He said:  
A measure taken during my tenure to avoid currency mismatches in the banking 
sector was the key for keeping financial stability during this disruption in the world 
economy. The lessons from previous crises are that we had a solid regulatory 
framework that allowed people to withdraw deposits in foreign or domestic currency 
without any consequence on the liquidity of any institution. 
Redrado said that emerging market central bankers ought to implement macroprudential 
tools for managing capital flows and countercyclical policies to shelter the domestic 
economy during global crises. 
Dated: October 4, 2024 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2023-01 
616
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 3