--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 6 Issue 2 
2024 
Lessons Learned: Paul Boothe Lessons Learned: Paul Boothe 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Economic History Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, Policy 
Design, Analysis, and Evaluation Commons, Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons, Public 
Administration Commons, Public Affairs Commons, Public Economics Commons, and the Public Policy 
Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Chute Lynch, Mary Anne (2024) "Lessons Learned: Paul Boothe," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 6 : Iss. 2, 
105-107. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1563 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/5 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol6/iss2/5

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Paul Boothe 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Paul Boothe served as Canada’s senior associate deputy minister of industry during the Global 
Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2007–2009. Boothe led the Canadian federal government’s negotiation 
team during the restructuring talks with Chrysler and General Motors (GM). He also negotiated 
with the Canadian Auto Workers (CAW), a union that included Tier 1 auto parts suppliers for 
all the major auto manufacturers worldwide. Canada align ed with the United States 
government to rescue the auto manufacturers and provided 20% of the funding to rescue the 
corporations and suppliers. From 2004 to 2005, Boothe served as the associate deputy minister 
of finance and Group of Seven (G-7) deputy for Canada; after the GFC, he was d eputy minister 
of the environment from 2010 to 2012. In 2016, Boothe was awarded the Order of Canada, the 
nation’s highest civilian honor, for his contributions to shaping Canadian economic and fiscal 
policy. He currently teaches in the executive program at the Ivey Business School  at Western 
University in Ontario. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview held with Boothe 
on May 9, 2022; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
It is important to present a united front when multiple countries are negotiating with 
industries. For best results, maximize and coordinate the strengths that each country 
brings to the negotiations.  
The negotiations with the auto industry were “very demanding—and it was relentless. There 
were no holidays ,” Boothe said. Because of the 80/20 partnership with the US, it was 
important to present a united front to the other side: “Anything that might be controversial 
between the two countries, we discussed it before we went in [to negotiations].” 
The two countries also coordinated to maximize the strengths of their personnel: 
There was a huge amount of uncertainty. There was no living memory in Industry 
Canada [a regulatory agency] of having gone through a process like this. We were 
learning by doing. I think that the combination of our industrial expertise and the 
financial mar ket and bankruptcy expertise of US Treasury worked very well. For 
example, the US Treasury took the lead in conceptualizing how the bankruptcy 
process would work, and we took the lead, at least for Canada, in saying, “Well, these 
are the kinds of undertakings in terms of production, et cetera, that we want from the 
companies.” 
Initially, US Treasury didn’t focus much on that, but I remember having discussions 
with [Obama manufacturing policy adviser] Ron Bloom about what our undertakings 
were like, and him having discussions with the Treasury and his colleagues in the 
White House, [leader of the US Auto Task Force] Steven Rattner, [National Economic 
Council Director] Larry Summers, and [Treasury Secretary] Timothy Geithner, about 
which of those undertakings would be appropriate for the US to talk to GM about. 
105

--- Page 4 ---
Other major events on which  the two countries’ teams coordinated closely were the 
bankruptcies of GM and Chrysler. Boothe described how careful coordination and innovative 
thinking between the Canadian and US teams streamlined the complicated process: 
Chrysler’s bankruptcy went first, and it was a bit simpler. It was a trial run. The other 
thing that complicated this bankrupt cy proceeding was that it needed to be an 
accelerated bankruptcy, but it was a bankruptcy in two countries. That’s not unheard 
of. Sometimes this happens , and the bankruptcy courts in the two countries 
collaborate. The view, especially for General Motors, was if we could keep GM Canada, 
which was a wholly owned subsidiary of GM Global, out of bankruptcy, then that 
would simplify matters substantially. That was our goal. That was the aim of both the 
US Treasury and us. . . . 
Ultimately, the Canadian bondhold ers were tracked down and they agreed to the 
haircut that we wanted, and GM Canada did not go into bankruptcy. We still 
maintained our proportionality with the US, but that meant that the way we financed 
things was a little bit different than the way US Treasury did , because it was a 
bankruptcy in one country and not in the other. 
Paying close attention to financial innovations and potential risks in the broad 
financial system can help detect little bumps that might grow into systemic crises.  
Boothe first heard about mortgage securitization when he was a G -7 deputy attending 
Financial Stability Forum meetings. He recalled one meeting where former Federal Reserve 
Chairman Alan Greenspan spoke about this new development.  
I can remember I used to sit ne xt to Alan Greenspan, and I remember him giving a 
presentation at the Financial Stability Forum and saying, “This is a great source of 
innovation. And this is expanding the US economy at a tremendous rate .” It was 
generally thought to be a very positive thing. And I ’ll be honest, I didn ’t fully 
understand it. I knew it wasn’t happening in Canada, and I didn ’t fully understand it, 
but it was happening in the US. I think a lot of people didn’t understand the potential 
downsides of this. 
Although there weren’t many subprime mortgages and securitization s in Canadian banks, 
looking back, Boothe said, “I wish we had paid more attention to the risks then." 
The US government had the idea that they were trying to encourage homeownership, 
and this was one of the ways that they would do it. But the risk got way out of hand. 
On one hand, it was a regulatory failure, but it was also a failure in the financial 
institutions to keep track of those risks, because when it came time to figure it out, 
when the music stopped—What musical chair should I sit in? Suddenly people looked 
around and there was either no chair, or they didn ’t know what chair was theirs. I 
think, with hindsight, it would’ve been great to have known where the risks were. We 
might have been able to avoid a lot of the problems.  
106
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 6 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Ultimately, Boothe pointed out, the effects of the US failure were not just limited to the United 
States. “If something happens in the US, it is a big worry for everybody in terms of financial 
markets,” he said. Going forward, shared information of a similar nature about potential risks 
should be carefully considered by groups like the G-7. 
Government leaders need to understand when the problem is systemic and support 
intervention even when such action is unpopular. 
“There are times when governments need to get involved, but pretty stringent conditions 
have to be met before that makes sense ,” Boothe emphasized . It was only  important for 
government to get involved in the affairs of private business, he elaborated, when the impact 
of not getting involved ha d a much broader reach for the economy —a systemic important 
impact for the broader economy. 
He praised former Prime Minister Stephen Harper for recognizing that having Chrysler and 
GM fail, especially to have them fail in Canada and not in the United States, would have been 
catastrophic for employment and the broader auto industry in the country , and he lauded 
Harper for having the courage to take the necessary steps  to prevent that . Supporting the 
rescue “was not a popular measure. . .  . It was not the ideological sweet spot for the 
conservative government at the time to be lending money to private companies ,” said 
Boothe. But the situation was unclear , and the government took steps to  protect the 
taxpayers’ interest, he noted. 
This is money that is the last resort. During the Global Financial Crisis, financial 
markets were paralyzed. You couldn ’t borrow money at any rate of interest. 
Governments had to step in. The restrictions were severe on GM and Chrysler and the 
suppliers, including changes in management. Not only that, [but] loans were given at 
penalty rates of interest.  
_____________________________________ 
Dated: July 2024 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022-05 
107
Lessons Learned: Paul Boothe Chute Lynch