--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 3 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Anthony Dowd Lessons Learned: Anthony Dowd 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Anthony Dowd," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 3, 
89-91. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1669 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss3/5 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss3/5

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
 
   
 
Anthony Dowd 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Anthony Dowd was an investment banker when former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker 
recruited him during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) to be his chief of staff for the President’s 
Economic Recovery Advisory Board (PERAB). As chairman of the PERAB, Volcker proposed 
what would become known as the Volcker Rule, a series of guardrails meant to curb banks’ 
involvement in proprietary trading and investing in private equity or hedge funds; they were 
adopted in the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010. 
When Chairman Volcker founded the Volcker Alliance in 2013, Dowd became a director and its 
first treasurer. The alliance is a nonpartisan nonprofit focused on the effective execution of 
public policies and on helping rebuild public trust in government. Dowd remains a director and 
served as interim president of the alliance in 2015 –16. In 2017, he became president and CEO 
of Fairfield-Maxwell Limited, an industrial holding company. This Lesson Learned is based on 
an interview held in January 2025; a full transcript may be found here. 
The revolving door between regulators and the private sector poses a challenge to the 
management of systemic risk. Tighter regulations could mitigate regulatory capture 
and reduce the risk to effective supervision. 
The regulatory toolkit has improved since the GFC, said Dowd, but much depends on the will 
of regulators to enforce the rules written into code. It becomes difficult to have effective 
supervision when bankers and their overseers are too close and regulators move from 
government to the private sec tor, becoming lobbyists and bankers representing the 
companies they used to regulate and facing the same people they used to work beside. 
Systemically important financial institutions  now have resident banking examiners, but they 
can become too familiar with their subjects as well, Dowd explained.  
There are people who go to work every day at JPMorgan who work for the 
government. They sit next to people who are paid two or three times more than they 
are, and they develop relationships and go to lunch. Ther e need to be some tougher 
rules around when you’re allowed to go work for the entity you regulated. 
Dowd noted that two big proponents of financial reform, former US Representative Barney 
Frank and Mary Miller, formerly undersecretary of the Treasury, were on the boards of banks 
that recently failed—Signature Bank and Silicon Valley Bank [SVB], respectively.  
That’s part of the problem, this regulatory capture. Banks can recruit public officials 
with their knowledge and access. I don’t know what the board f ees were at those 
banks, but I’m sure they were substantial. Mr. Volcker wrote a piece back in 2011 or 
’12, where he said that the Occupy Wall Street and Occupy the SEC groups’ aim was 
off. He said they should have called themselves Occupy K Street. 
89

--- Page 4 ---
The Un ited States could benefit from adopting some of the same rules around board 
independence and executive governance that exist in the European Union, Dowd suggested. 
The effect of these rules is not easy to measure, but they could reduce the systemic risk that 
comes from loose governance practices and “incestuous” environments in boardrooms. 
Dowd explained further,  
In Europe, you can’t be chairman of the bank and be the CEO. They separate those two 
functions. Once you’re on a board for more than five or six years, you’re deemed no 
longer independent because you’ve been collecting board fees for a significant 
amount o f time. You’ve developed relationships with other board members and 
management, and they have requirements for independence. So, it forces a steady 
turnover of board members. 
The different practices in the US lead to some questionable situations, as demons trated by 
an illustration he shared:  
At First Republic, maybe not recently, but for a long time, the chairman and the CEO 
were the same person. The board members, if you look at their backgrounds, they 
were all friends. They were on the board of the San F rancisco Art Museum together 
with different clients of the bank. So, it was a bit incestuous. Whereas in Europe they 
have these rules that promote good governance, and it’d be nice to see some of that 
here. 
The political will to make difficult regulatory d ecisions is just as important to the 
stability of the banking system as good regulation, perhaps more so.  
Dowd recalled how Silicon Valley Bank lobbied for an exemption to the Volker Rule when 
the Dodd-Frank Act was being drafted, to protect its investment banking offerings to clients 
that it had developed in the decade before the GFC. The bank argued it would have to divest 
investment funds that it claimed were important to its business model.  
Mr. Volcker hadn’t even heard of the bank before. It was small. It was about $15 billion 
in assets. He asked me about it. I looked it up and Mr. Volcker said: “Well, you talk to 
the [SVB] CEO.” We were also working with Citigroup and some of the big banks at 
the time, which drew more of his attention.  
I had several  conversations with the CEO, and then later on with their lobbyist. We 
kept declining their requests, saying that we would not support an exemption for 
them, as we’d have to support other exemptions. And we ended up having some 
conversations with [US] Sena tors [Barbara] Boxer and [Dianne] Feinstein [from 
California] about it as well, as they were trying to support one of their constituent 
banks. But all throughout the Dodd-Frank process and the Volcker Rule amendment, 
we kept pushing back on Silicon Valley Bank, but unfortunately, during the 
conference negotiations, their exemption was slid in. 
90
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
SVB grew from a $15 billion institution in 2010, to $150 billion at the time of its collapse in 
2023, Dowd noted. And yet, the system was able to absorb the shock of its collapse, along 
with the subsequent demise of Signature Bank and First Republic. The capitalization of the 
banking system remained fairly strong and the other banks that were in compliance didn’t 
have any serious issues, so regulation proved effective, even as the banking institutions have 
become larger and more concentrated, he said.  
Dowd emphasized that the success of any regulatory system depends on the will of the 
regulators to act quickly when needed, even when they may be criticized. “You’re alwa ys 
going to get criticism,” he said.  
It’s easy to point fingers at the regulators and I wasn’t surprised by some of the noise, 
but I think the resolution regulators actually did a good job. I think it’s too bad about 
First Republic Bank. I think they were a casualty. I mean, they were stronger than SVB. 
They didn’t do what Silicon Valley Bank did and Signature Bank did, but they did have 
a large number of loans to that community. So, I think they were kind of forced into 
the JPMorgan marriage, but again, the system got through it fine. 
Chairman Volcker believed that regulators should be the “‘cop on the beat’” and ensured that 
banking supervision and the integrity of the banking system was discussed at all Fed 
meetings, said Dowd. The topic was on the agend a almost 20 times a year when he was 
chairman but dropped steadily under successive Fed chairs and appeared on the agenda only 
once or twice a year during Ben Bernanke’s term. Ensuring there was a focus on supervision 
and accountability was key for Chairman Volcker, said Dowd: 
One of the things that Mr. Volcker felt was as important as the Volcker Rule was 
making sure that the Fed had a “cop on the beat,” so to speak. He pushed very hard to 
have a vice chair of supervision named in the Dodd -Frank bill, so t hat would be a 
legislated position, a political appointee. So, there’d be somebody in a senior position 
at the Fed who was accountable to Congress, was accountable to the public, for the 
health of the banking system. The vice chairman is at every meeting, and supervision 
is on the agenda. 
“That was a big thing, to have somebody whose political career was on the line for the health 
of the banks,” said Dowd. 
Dated: October 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2024-14 
91
Lessons Learned: Anthony Dowd Cardona