--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 3 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Katalin Mérő Lessons Learned: Katalin Mér  
Salil Gupta 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Gupta, Salil (2025) "Lessons Learned: Katalin Mérő," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 3, 92-95. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1671 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss3/7 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss3/7

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Katalin Mérő 
By Salil Gupta 
Between 1990 and 2010, Katalin Mérő served in various roles for Hungary’s central bank, 
Magyar Nemzeti  Bank, and the Hungarian Financial Supervisory Authority. She led  the 
Economics, Risk Assessment, and Regulatory Directorate between 2005 and 2019 and was the 
deputy head of the Financial Stability Department. She was also a member of the Joint Board 
of Ap peal of European Supervisory Authority from 2011 to 2021. Mérő graduated from the 
Corvinus University of Budapest and received a PhD in 2005 from the Budapest University of 
Technology and Economics. Since 2016, she has served  as an associate professor at B udapest 
Business School, University of Applied Sciences in Budapest. This Lessons Learned summary is 
based on an interview held in October 2022; the full transcript is available here.  
For a banking system that is evolving from one that is government controlled to a 
private model based on international best practices and standards, researching the 
experiences and available structures of other systems can result in a more efficient 
evolution.  
The evolution of the Hungarian banking system has valuable lessons for other evolving 
systems. During the socialist period, Hungary’s central bank provided commercial loans to 
the economy, while a large bank, OTP, was tasked with taking deposits and providing loans 
to households. The system was characterized by limited regulation and undercapitalization. 
The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 provided Hungary with the opportunity to create a 
more stable and sound banking system. 
After 1991, Hungary created five new commercial banks to take over the central bank’s 
previous role of providing corporate loans. This created a two-tier banking system in which 
commercial and retail clients were each serviced by separate banks. It took a few more years 
for the creation of a single banking system with adequate regulatory infrastructure that 
catered to both corporations and households in Hungary. 
Mérő explained: 
In the late ’80s, it was not a stable banking sys tem, of course. This is the legacy, and 
there were several bank consolidation waves in Hungary in which the capital of the 
banks was raised to eliminate the losses. There was a regulatory package introduced, 
as I remember it , in 1991, which was worked out with the help of the World Bank 
experts. The Hungarian regulators worked out the new regulatory reform, which was 
in line with international best practices. The banking law, the central bank law, the 
accounting law, the bankruptcy law, all changed in one huge regulatory wave. We 
called it regulatory shock therapy. 
Hungary’s banking system received several recapitalization (or “consolidation”) packages 
from the government because of legacy nonperforming loans provided to state -owned 
92

--- Page 4 ---
companies in the 1980s. After the government’s clean -up efforts, some banks were 
privatized and sold to foreign owners.   
In the early 1990s, Hungary had almost no banking regulation, with a simple 5% capital 
requirement, and no provisioning rules for banks. Mérő recalls that the banking system was 
technically insolvent, owing to the central bank’s poor business assessments i n providing 
commercial loans and very high compensation levels. This led to the creation of an 
independent body dedicated to banking regulation. This regulatory body was later expanded 
to include the securities market and eventually formed Hungary’s Financ ial Supervisory 
Authority.  
In 2013, the Hungarian central bank was merged with the Financial Supervisory Authority. 
The central bank was responsible for macroprudential policies, such as adopting Basel III 
capital rules, and determining capital buffers for individual banks.    
Mérő believes that it would have been helpful for Hungary to have joined the European 
banking union, since the union adds an element of discipline to banking supervision. In such 
a scenario, the European Central Bank ( ECB) would have  been directly responsible for 
supervising the largest banks in Hungary. The ECB would also have been able to make 
recommendations on regulatory rules, with the final power of authorization remaining with 
the Hungarian central bank. Hungary would have bene fitted by adopting international best 
practices and employing better-trained staff. 
Although loans in foreign currencies may seem attractive because of lower interest 
rates, it is essential that policymakers analyze all possible negative scenarios to 
uncover both exchange rate and systemic risks and then balance those risks against 
the benefits.   
Hungary underestimated the risks of allowing households to take mortgage loans in foreign 
currencies. In 2000, the Hungarian government first introduced a governm ent-supported 
lending facility to improve the mortgage offerings for households and support home 
ownership. The government provided subsidies for such mortgages that increased under a 
later version of the program. However, by the mid -2000s government subsi dies were cut 
back and banks began offering foreign-currency-denominated mortgages, in Swiss francs 
and euros. At the time, Hungarian forint –denominated loans had relatively high interest 
rates of 8%, compared to euro-denominated loans at rates of 1 to 2%, which became popular.  
One of the mistakes regulators made was to underestimate the risks of allowing households 
to acquire foreign-currency-denominated mortgages without a thorough analysis of the 
wider systemic implications and all possible scenarios . They assumed that Hungary would, 
as planned, adopt the euro as its common currency before the longer -dated euro -
denominated mortgage loans matured. Not only were the central bank and  the Financial 
Supervisory Authority late in noticing the buildup in foreign currency loans, but after a 
change in government, Hungary adopted a constitutional amendment keeping it out of the 
eurozone.  
 
93
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
Mérő pointed out:  
I think, at that time, it was our belief that by the expiry of the loans , Hungary would 
be a member of the eurozone. We d idn’t know when, but at some point in time, 
between issuing the loan and repaying the loan, there would be the eurozone 
membership. . . .  
I think that the major mistake was our mistake. [The] central bank’s and the Financial 
Supervisory Authority’s as well. We recognized very, very late several things. . . . 
However, the problem was that we analyzed the exchange rate co -movement 
between the Swiss franc and the euro, and previously the German mark. Because the 
euro is in a way a successor of the German mark. We calculated the correlation 
between the two with a  30-year backward window. We found that there [was] a more 
than  90% correlation between the German mark rate or the euro and the Swiss franc. 
That’s why we didn’t recognize that the Swiss franc and the euro’s co-movement can 
disappear from the market, because during crisis time, the Swiss franc is a currency 
that is a safe haven for investors. This was a mistake. 
In October 2007, the Financial Supervisory Authority identified the problem with foreign 
currency loans and wrote a warning letter to the heads of the major banks. Owing to the lack 
of data sharing and unclear division of responsibilities between regulators, the Hungarian 
regulators were unable to recognize the maturity mismatch in a timely manner.   
Mérő believes that a deeper analysis of increased mortgage lending in foreign currencies by 
regulators would have identified the systemic risks sooner.  
I think this FX lending was a mistak e, definitely. I think it’s a lesson that there is no 
free lunch, [even when it] seems like a free lunch. . . . If there are more loans for the 
lower price, it means more risk. 
A financial crisis knows no borders. International cooperation and adopting bes t 
practices can help regulators prepare for and deal with a crisis that may originate 
outside one’s borders.  
Hungary falsely assumed that the contagion from the US subprime crisis would not impact 
its economy, due to the lack of securitized assets in its system. Before September 2008, 
Hungary’s regulators were preparing for the adoption of the Basel II capital ru les. Mero 
states that Hungary’s regulators were blindsided by the collapse of Lehman Brothers mid -
month and the worsening Global Financial Crisis. Hungary experienced a sudden stop in 
foreign exchange lending, along with maturity mismatches in the banking system. 
Refinancing activity dried up because of the overleveraged nature of Hungarian households 
and banks at the time. Mérő recalled:  
Lehman Brothers collapsed in September of 2008, and by that time we were ready 
with the Basel II implementation, but we  were not prepared for the Global Financial 
Crisis, because we [thought] that in Hungary we are not affected, until the moment 
94
Lessons Learned: Katalin Mér? Gupta

--- Page 6 ---
Lehman Brothers collapsed. It was a shock for us that Lehman Brothers collapsed, 
and the Global Financial Crisis emerged. I can say that we were not prepared for it. It 
was a surprise and a shock for the Hungarian regulators, authorities, financial 
markets, for everybody. . . . 
There were negotiations with the parent banks not to withdraw their support from 
the Central European subs idiaries because it was of the utmost importance not to 
withdraw the funds because even the parent banks were in trouble. They were full of 
toxic assets. Their governments helped them, and the foreign governments, of course, 
didn’t want their banks to finance Central Europe. 
That’s why there was the so-called Vienna Initiative to manage this situation, in which 
the owners of the banks, and the governments, agreed that the Western European 
banks would not withdraw funds from the Central Europe area and would  continue 
to finance their subsidiaries. This was the most urgent step to solve that problem, 
[where] short -term finance could have disappeared from the balance sheet of the 
banks.  
Mérő said that such international cooperation during crisis periods is very important to help 
stabilize the financial system. She also pointed to the efforts taken by Hungary after the crisis 
to strengthen its infrastructure by adopting “all the tools which are offered, or which  are in 
line with the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) and the Capital Requirements Regulation 
(CRR), [which is] the European version [of] Basel III’s regulation.” These steps helped 
prepare the system for the next crisis and gave the central bank tools it could effectively 
deploy during the COVID-19 crisis. 
Dated: October 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022–15 
 
95
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3