--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Luis Jácome Lessons Learned: Luis Jácome 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Luis Jácome," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 2, 
369-371. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1663 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/17 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss2/17

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Luis Já  come 
By Mercedes Cárdoná 
Luis Jácome was appointed president of the board of Ecuador ’s central bank in 1998 by newly 
elected President Jamil Mahuad. He and other members of the board resigned in 1999 in protest 
against a number of crisis -intervention measures they saw as threatening the bank’s 
independence to set monetary policy.  
Since the 1970s, Ecuador’s economy had experienced a period of growth fueled by oil exports, 
but by the mi d-1990s the economy was reeling from a series of shocks, among them:  a sharp 
drop in the price of oil, the effects of severe flooding on the country’s agricultural production, 
and the cost of waging a war with neighbor ing Peru. The shocks destabilized the country’s 
banking system, leading to bank runs and spiraling depreciation of the currency. Mahuad was 
deposed by a military coup in January 1999 and replaced by his vice president, Gustabo Noboa. 
Shortly after the coup, Ecuador replaced the Ecuadorian sucre with the US dollar, which helped 
to halt bank runs and restored some trust in the financial system. This “Lesson Learned” is based 
on two interviews with Jácome in March 2023; the full transcript may be found here. 
When liberalizing a financial system, authorities should design and build a strong 
prudential supervisory framework to help the financial system and economy 
withstand shocks.  
By the end of the 20th century, Ecuador had undergone a liberalization of its financial system 
that did not include a parallel development of financial regulation to protect the integrity of 
its banking industry. Legislation passed in 1994 , which  had opened the door to market -
driven interest rates and foreign exchange rates, led in the short term to lower rates. This 
was not a development exclusive to Ecuador, but one that affected many Latin American 
countries at the encouragement of international organizations.  
This might have been the crucial mistake that left Ecuador vulnerable by the late 1990s, 
Jácome explained,  
Unfortunately, while Ecuador opened its capital account and implemented financial 
liberalization, the new law did not put emphasis on strengthening financial regulation 
and supervision. Moreover, the law did not give the banking supervision agency and 
the government the legal support and the instruments required to handle banking 
crises. In fact, the spirit of the law was to allow free ex it from the market without 
regard to the potential costs of financial contagion. This was a major mistake of the 
new legislation. The combination of financial liberalization, weak financial regulation 
and supervision, and the absence of legislation to hand le banking crises was a lethal 
policy mix. 
Starting in the mid -1990s, external shocks, including a sharp drop in the price of oil —the 
country’s key export ánd source of tráde revenue —armed conflict with neighbor ing Peru, 
369

--- Page 4 ---
and floods caused by El Niño that decimated crops in the coastal regions , triggered a crisis 
that included ballooning inflation and budget deficits, and which led to the failure of multiple 
banks. However, when the banks began to fail, neither the Ecuadorian government nor the 
central bank had the authority to resolve insolvent banks. They could not hold auctions of 
assets and liabilities of insolvent banks to avoid closing them without paying depositors.  
Political instability further contribut ed to the economic downturn, as three presidents 
served over a five-year period—and only one served his full term. Successive governments 
adopted a series of measures (such as declaring a bank holiday in March 1999) that not only 
failed but did not have the support of the newly independent central bank. Jácome explained 
that the bank had warned that the measures (including a transaction tax on all financial  
transactions and an unsustainable blanket deposit guarantee) would spur more Ecuadorians 
to draw their money from banks, which in turn would further devastate the banking system. 
Depositors also exchanged their withdrawn sucre deposits for dollars to protect themselves 
from inflation and instability , which put downward pressure on the sucre  and increased 
inflation, thus feeding the vicious cycle. 
In retrospect, it is clear to Jácome that the country’s ambitious financial reforms should have 
been paired with sensible improvements to  the nátion’s supervision and regulation 
structures.  
Preventing such a systemic financial crisis and, therefore, the collapse of the economy 
in the late 1990s, would have required having a sound and resilient banking system 
and a more effective banking regulation and supervision . To support this claim, 
remember that the Peruvian economy was hit by the same shocks, namely El Niño 
and the declining oil prices. And while the financial system was hit, this country 
managed to avoid a banking crisis. First, because the financial system  was on better 
footing and, second, because the financial authorities in Peru implemented corrective 
actions soon enough and conducted bank resolution as they had better banking 
legislation. 
A true independent central bank and bank supervisory function are two foundational 
pillars that can help the banking system withstand shocks.  
Jácome was the first board president to lead an independent central bank  in Ecuador , as 
established by a new constitution in 1998, but the bank struggled as the president  of the 
republic, Jamil Mahuad , under political pressure , repeatedly challenged  its authority over 
monetary policy. The newly  arrived board first clashed with the executive when it tried to 
appoint a general manager for the bank and the president of the republic rejected its choice 
for the post. The board relented and nominated a candidate the members knew would be 
approved.  
In retrospect, Jácome says this initial concession might have emboldened President Mahuad, 
who continued to chállenge the bánk’s independence. He explained,  
While in theory we were running a politically independent central bank, the 
relationship with the government was difficult. It was so since the onset, and it only 
370
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
got worse over time. In fact, the president of the republic at that time, on more than 
one oc casion, stated that he respected the independence of the central bank 
established in the law, but he didn't like it. He was of the view that an elected 
president should be in charge, or should be responsible, of both fiscal and monetary 
policy. He was agai nst the consensus forged globally at that time about having 
independent central banks. So , the relationship with the government became very 
difficult. 
Roughly three months later, Jácome and the board had another disagreement with President 
Mahuad over an i nternátionál stábilizátion loán meánt to support Ecuádor’s bálánce of 
payments. The president had demanded that the central bank appropriate the loan for fiscal 
expenditure purposes , said Jácome, a condition he refused . Eventually, the government 
passed legislation allowing it to set interest rates; at this point, Jácome and four of the five 
members of the board resigned.  
Central bank independence is a key factor to economic stability , said Jácome. He noted how 
countries like Argentina and Venezuela, which have weak central banks with little autonomy, 
continue to struggle  economically. Mean while, Peru—which has been in turmoil for a 
decade, including recent civil unrest and the ouster of a sitting president —has maintained 
some economic stability throughout the political storm. That country has an independent 
central bank, fiscal policy governed by law , and a very independent banking supervision 
authority.  
Jácome pointed out that the Ecuadorian bank supervisor at the time was not an independent 
institution, ánother key weákness in the country’s bánking system:  
While the government and Congress appointed the banking authority, bankers often 
had a say in selecting this name. As a result, bankers had influence on banking 
regulation and supervision. As for the conduct of fiscal policy, it was a government 
responsibility, as alluded to before. 
He went on to say:  
Ideally, we should have had a better financial sector law that included strong financial 
supervision and regulation as well as provisions to handle banking crises. As for fiscal 
policy, it would have been better to have political stability and governments [that 
were] more fiscally responsible. 
Jácome concluded,
Not only in Ecuador, but everywhere : Central bank independence works. There is 
abundant empirical literature supporting its benefits. Having said that, I believe 
central bank independence works provided politicians accept it and respect it in 
practice. It is not enough to confer legal independence to the central bank. 
Dáted: June 2025 
YPFS Lessons Leárned No. 2022–58  
371
Lessons Learned: Luis Jácome Cardona