--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
Emergency Liquidity Assistance and Monetary Financing in the Emergency Liquidity Assistance and Monetary Financing in the 
European Union: A Case Study in Fiscal Cooperation? European Union: A Case Study in Fiscal Cooperation? 
Vincient Arnold 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Arnold, Vincient (2025) "Emergency Liquidity Assistance and Monetary Financing in the European Union: 
A Case Study in Fiscal Cooperation?," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 2, 293-312. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1657 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/11 
This Note is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This note is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/
iss2/11

--- Page 3 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
Emergency Liquidity Assistance and  
Monetary Financing in the European Union:  
A Case Study in Fiscal Cooperation?1 
Vincient Arnold 2  
June 25, 2025 
Abstract 
In the European Union (EU), primary EU treaty law prohibits central banks from engaging in 
monetary financing, which includes lending to insolvent firms. This legal prohibition exists 
alongside, and in parallel to, various regulatory provisions of the Eurosystem. As a result, EU 
Member State central banks face unique legal limitations when acting in their roles as 
lenders of last resort, providing emergency liquidity assistance (ELA). In practice, European 
central banks —both members of the Eurosystem and no t—lend to firms of questionable 
solvency with some frequency, often creatively employing fiscal guarantees to limit their 
balance sheet exposure and shift the lending risk to the fiscal authority, thereby reducing the 
risk of monetary financing as describe d in EU law. Through stylized case studies, this note 
explores instances where ELA intersects with issues of solvency, highlighting the challenges 
that European central banks face. It also discusses the role of fiscal guarantees as a policy 
tool for such situations, describing their benefits, risks, and limitations. The note concludes 
that policymakers should make plans for such scenarios ahead of time in line with applicable 
regulations on solvency and should maintain coordination with fiscal authorities w hen 
appropriate.  
Keywords: emergency liquidity assistance , European Union, financial crises , financial 
regulation, monetary financing 
  
 
1 A version of this note was originally published on the Yale School of Management’s Systemic Risk  blog on  
January 30, 2025. 
2 Research Associate at the Yale Program on Financial Stability; email: vincient.arnold@yale.edu. The views 
expressed are those of the author and not necessarily those of the institutions with which the author is 
affiliated. 
293

--- Page 4 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
Introduction 
Central banks are often faced with a cruel irony: they are (almost always) mandated not to 
lend to insolvent firms and, by nature of being the lender of last resort (LOLR), face a pool of 
potential borrowers that are uniquely likely to be insolvent. The question of solvency is 
therefore one of considerable importance to central bankers and illustrates the impo rtant 
role of bank examiners and supervisory authorities. In principle, central bankers should not 
veer into fiscal policy by lending to insolvent firms. In practice, central banks frequently lend 
to insolvent firms, sometimes because they thought the firm was solvent when it wasn’t, and 
sometimes despite an ex ante acknowledgement of insolvency. This often creates challenges 
for central banks:3 Depending on their operating framework and legal system, they may be 
in violation of legal rules or norms; publicization of their intervention might hurt their 
credibility; their political independence might be threatened; they may create perverse 
incentives for certain classes of creditors in other banks; and in extremis, they risk taking 
capital losses above what is viewed as appropriate for central bank interventions.   
The aim of this note is not to provide a playbook for assessing solvency —how it should be 
measured, by which authority, etc. Nor will it deal with the related consideration of viability 
or normative questions about whether a central bank should care about solvency, viability, 
etc. This note stipulates that in the vast majority of legal and regulatory frameworks around 
the world, particularly those in Europe, central banks generally do face constraints—legal 
and regulatory—on lending to insolvent and/or unviable firms. The question, then, is what 
to make of lending to insolvent firms gone wrong. 
The European Union (EU) provides a particularly fruitful setting for this question, since in 
the EU, central bank financing of an insolvent firm is legally prohibited as monetary 
financing, a term normally associated with the direct purchase of govern ment debt by 
monetary authorities. This note will explore through stylized case studies how the EU 
handles the legal and procedural limits on monetary financing as it relates to emergency 
liquidity assistance (ELA).4 (To be clear, ELA has a specific meaning in the Eurosystem: while 
central bank lending for monetary policy is the responsibility of the European Central Bank 
[ECB], central bank lending for the purposes of financial stability, termed ELA, is the 
responsibility of the central banks of the me mber nations that are part of the Eurosystem  
[ECB 2024].) Then, drawing on those case studies, the note will sketch out some advantages 
and vulnerabilities associated with a common policy intervention employed in such 
situations: fiscal guarantees.  
 
 
3 It should also be noted that plenty of emergency liquidity assistance is in practice granted by non –central 
banks, but we will not discuss that here since no monetary financing concerns attach to such lending.  
4 I exclude here the more fam iliar types of monetary financing, which often center on the monetary authority 
providing direct finance to governments. Such funding will be discussed only insofar as it informs legal norms 
around monetary financing in ELA or is suspected to have occurred via ELA.  
294
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
In Principle: The Brussels View on ELA and Monetary Financing 
The EU is a particularly useful setting to analyze norms and rules about monetary financing 
because the EU’s prohibition of it is a, and sometimes the, binding constraint on emergency 
lending.  
Article 123 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)   
Discussion of European regulations necessarily involves the Venn diagram that is Europe: 
Member States of the European Union (not all in the euro area); members of the euro area 
(all of which are also members of the EU); and European nations that are part of neither the 
EU nor the euro area. Here, the EU is the operative group. The EU’s general prohibition on 
monetary financing is sometimes discussed as European Central Bank —and therefore euro 
area—regulation. That characterization, however, is misleading. While the ECB has 
implemented procedural arrangements on the provision on ELA and, in 2013, provided a 
public communication with respect to ELA operations in the form of an agree ment among 
ECB member nations, ECB agreements are not legally binding but rather are soft law  (ECB 
2013).5  
In contrast, the prohibition on monetary financing is found in Article 123(1) of the Treaty on 
the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU6), which reads [emphasis added]:  
Overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility with the European Central Bank 
or with the central banks of the Member States (hereinafter referred to as ‘national 
central banks’ [NCBs]) in favour of Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, central 
governments, regional, local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public 
law, or public undertakings of Member States  shall be prohibited, as shall the 
purchase directly from them by the European Central Bank or national central banks of 
debt instruments. (EU 2012) 
 
5 According to the EU , “soft law is the term applied to EU measures, such as guidelines, recommendations, 
declarations and opinions, which – in contrast to regulations, directives, and decisions – are not binding on 
those to whom they are addressed” (EU 2024). While not strictly legally binding, soft law does often have policy 
effects (similar to agency guidance or published FAQs in the United States).  
6 The TFEU—itself based on the Treaty of Maastricht of 1992—is one of the EU’s two foundational treaties (the 
other being the Treaty on European Union), which sets out in detail the principles and objectives of the EU and 
the scope and functional responsibilities of EU institutions (the Treaty on European Union  in contrast defines 
the EU’s purpose and lays out its institutions and form) (EU 2018). As a technicality, before the Lisbon Treaty’s 
going into effect in 2009, TFEU Article 123 was Article 101 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community, 
but the content was unchanged when the Lisbon Treaty relocated the article. 
295
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 6 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
As such, Article 123 is binding on all Member States, irrespective of their participation in the 
Eurosystem. In other words, this is a statutory implementation of EU-level law to which even 
non-Eurozone EU members7 (for example, Denmark, the UK before 2020) are subject.8  
The Long Arm of Article 123 
The operative phrase of TFEU Article 123 is “public undertakings.” That is, public action that 
should legally be taken by the Member State governments ( in other words,  through fiscal 
resources rather than monetary resources). Th e Brussels View—what I’ve termed the EU’s 
view on monetary financing —is that bank recapitalizations and restructurings, which 
lending to an ex ante insolvent firm would be, are a public undertaking and thus should be 
supported with public (or, state) resources. Various public documents make this clear. For 
example, in a 2018 speech, then–ECB executive board member Yves Mersch said [emphasis 
in original]:  
The ECB has repeatedly stated  . . .  that financing by central banks, even when granted 
independently and at their full discretion, of credit institutions other than in connection 
with their central banking tasks, in particular the support of insolvent  credit and/or 
other financial institutions, is incompatible with the monetary financing prohi bition. 
Financing insolvent institutions is a government task – indeed the ECB has identified 
criteria to distinguish between government tasks and central banking tasks. The ECB 
has also repeatedly clarified that while central banks may be involved in admi nistering 
resolution measures, they should not finance them . National central banks could also 
administer resolution measures on a genuine agency basis on behalf and for the account 
of a third party , that is, the government or one of its entities.  In this case, however, the 
central bank would not itself provide liquidity, but simply carry out these tasks like an 
agent. (Mersch 2018) 
In other words, the Brussels View  is that central banks may be as involved as they find 
convenient in administering liquidity—even to insolvent institutions —but they cannot 
finance lending to an insolvent institution. Operationalized, this means that the fiscal 
authority (or some other organ of the state, such as the  ministry of economy, sovereign 
wealth fund, etc.) must bear the counterparty risk. 
It is also worth noting that monetary policy operations do not fall within the scope of State 
Aid rules pursuant to Article 107(1) of the TFEU; ELA operations are also excluded, subject 
 
7 This of course excludes the very few nations that have unilaterally adopted the euro and are neither Member 
States of the EU nor members of the Eurosystem.  Further, it excludes the four nations (Andorra, Monaco, San 
Marino, and Vatican City) that have, with the approval of the EU, adopted the euro but are neither EU Member 
States nor members of the Eurosystem.  
8 Explicitly, TFEU Article 139(2) excludes Article 123 in the list of TFEU articles that do not apply to Member 
States with a derogation: even non-euro Member States must comply by virtue of being signatories to the TFEU. 
296
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
to specific LOLR  conditions being met.9 Accordingly, the provision of ELA to an insolvent 
credit institution would constitute prohibited State Aid. 
In 2017, the ECB published its ELA Agreement. In the agreement —which, for the avoidance 
of doubt, is soft law in the EU and not legally binding as such—the ECB clarifies its views on 
ELA and monetary financing, writing:  
The violation of the prohibition of monetary financing laid down in Article 123 TFEU 
may constitute an interference with the objectives and tasks of the  ESCB [European 
System of Central Banks]. The provision of ELA as notified under Sections 3.2(b) and 3.3 
is, therefore, assessed ex ante as regards compliance with the prohibition of monetary 
financing. ELA transactions akin to an overdraft facility or any other type of credit facility 
for the State, in particular, any financing of the public sector’s obligations vis-à-vis third 
parties, or the central bank de facto taking over a State task, violate the prohibition of 
monetary financing. (ECB 2017, paras. 5.2–5.3) 
The agreement reference s the ECB Governing Council’s ability to prohibit the extension of 
ELA by a national central bank ( that is , a central bank of a country participating in the 
Eurosystem) on the basis of monetary financing, insofar as ELA inconsistent with the 
prohibition on monetary financing interferes with the ECB’s tasks and responsibilities , as 
laid out in Article 14.4 of the Statue of the European System of Central Banks and of the 
European Central Bank (ESCB Statute) (EU 2009). The prohibition on monetary financing is 
binding hard law at the EU level, even when other aspects of the ELA Agreement are not.10  
The ECB has since updated its ELA guidance, most recently as of the time of writing in 
September 2024. In relevant part, the 2024 ELA Agreement preserves the 2017 EL A 
 
9 Communication from the Commission  “on the application, from August 2013, of State aid rules ( . . . )” (EC 
2013).  
In accordance with paragraph 62 of the Banking Communication:  
The ordinary activities of central banks related to monetary policy, such as open market operations and 
standing facilities, do not fall within the scope of the State aid rules. Dedicated support to a specific credit 
institution (commonly referred to as “emergency liquidity assistance ”) may constitute aid unless the 
following cumulative conditions are met (footnote 20: In such cases, the measures will subsequently be 
assessed as part of the restructuring plan):  
(a) the credit institution is temporarily illiqui d but solvent at the moment of the liquidity provision 
which occurs in exceptional circumstances and is not part of a larger aid package;  
(b) the facility is fully secured by collateral to which appropriate haircuts are applied, in function of its 
quality and market value;  
(c) the central bank charges a penal interest rate to the beneficiary; and  
(d) the measure is taken at the central bank's own initiative, and in particular is not backed by any 
counter-guarantee of the State. (EC 2013)  
10 This is an important dist inction: while the ELA Agreement itself is not hard law in the EU by nature of it s 
being an ECB “agreement,” Article 14.4 of the ESCB Statute is primary law insofar as it is annexed in a protocol 
(no. 4) to the TFEU. Since the EU is a supranational organiz ation and not a single sovereign country, its 
foundational (or primary) law is not a constitution but rather treaties ratified by its Member States. In other 
words, EU treaties are the EU’s primary law, and its secondary law comprises the body of law that is derivative 
of those treaties (for example, regulations, directions, etc.) (EC n.d.). 
297
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 8 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
Agreement’s explicit permitting of the ECB Governing Council to prohibit the extension of 
ELA by an NCB on the basis of monetary financing.11   
Although this agreement was published and amended after the resolution of the cases 
examined here, it is instrumental for understanding the ECB’s view on ELA interacting with 
the monetary financing prohibition. 
In Practice: Stylized Cases of Alleged Monetary Financing via the 
ELA Mechanism 
Determination of a bank’s solvency and/or viability is deeply complex and r equires two 
things in short supply during a crisis: time and detailed information. In practice, during the 
acute phase of a crisis, distinguishing between solvent and insolvent 12 may be impractical  
(Goodhart 1999).  
The nightmare scenario for central banks, then, happens not infrequently: a potentially 
systemic institution applies to the central bank for emergency liquidity at the 11th hour, and 
the authorities have limited or insufficient information about the instit ution’s condition. 
Many central banks in such scenarios choose to err on the side of caution but balance the 
risks they take in lending to a potentially insolvent firm by obtaining guarantees from the 
state.  
Following are some stylized examples of central  banks’ handling of lending to potentially 
insolvent banks, and how they handled risks associated with monetary financing (all before 
the publication of the ECB’s 2013 ELA procedures). 
Ireland 2009 
In mid -January 2009, the Irish government nationalized Ang lo Irish Bank (Anglo) after it 
faced severe losses and deposit outflows. In March, the Central Bank of Ireland (CBIR) 
provided Anglo with ELA, under which the CBIR accepted a broader range of collateral than 
would be permitted in standing ECB liquidity operations. It continued this lending for years. 
When it became clear that Anglo was running out of even non -ECB-eligible collateral, the 
finance ministry recapitalized the bank with nonmarketable promissory notes, which drew 
much criticism from the European Commission (EC). Through 2010 and 2011, that ELA 
 
11 For a detailed analysis of the changes to the ELA Agreement writ large, see Gortsos (2024). 
12 Defining solvency and its importance (and distinction to viability) is outside the scope of this note, but suffice 
it to say that determining it, however construed, is a practically difficult task under time and resource 
constraints. For numerous reasons, theory notwithstanding, solvency determination can be impractical. First, 
to determine if assets exceed liabilities, policymakers need to be able to value assets, which may not be possible 
if entire markets for certain assets are frozen and the price discovery mechanism has collapsed. Lending 
authorities may also have limited or imperfect supervisory information. Even if supervisory information exists 
and price discovery is still possible, it is often time that is the binding constraint, with LOLRs given mere hours 
in many cases to determine solvency.  
298
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
enjoyed a state guarantee. Eventually, Irish authorities resolved the bank. On the Anglo case 
generally, see Honohan (2010). 
The Anglo case was a controversial touchstone for European and international think ing on 
monetary financing via ELA. While the initial intent of the emergency liquidity was for it to 
be short term, it ended up being extended for four years and accounting for a large share of 
Anglo’s funding needs. The Anglo case even prompted some Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS) researchers to argue that, despite frequent use of ELA by central banks to 
help unwind insolvent banks, it might be time to retire the practice and provide ELA only to 
going-concern institutions  (Baudino, Murphy, and Svo ronos 2020) . BIS researchers also 
argue that central banks should be transparent about the fiscal implications of any liquidity 
advanced to banks.  
The finance ministry’s issuance of nonmarketable government promissory notes to Anglo 
has received particular criticism with respect to monetary financing. In this case, the 
monetary financing allegation relates to both the more familiar form of monetary 
financing—when the central bank buys government debt directly 13—and to the Brussels 
View interpretation of monetary financing as it relates to ELA specifically. With respect to 
the Brussels View, the monetary authority was advancing liquidity to a potentially insolvent 
institution, potentially in violation of TFEU Article 123. 
With respect to the direct financing of government debt, in essence, the fiscal authority 
owned Anglo at the time (after nationalization) and needed to provide it with a capital 
injection so that it could obtain liquidity at the CBIR. To do so, the fiscal authority would 
typically issue debt publicly, in standard auction form. However, Ireland had very limited 
fiscal space and, as a result of the crisis, was facing a nearly nonexistent market for its 
sovereign debt; issuing debt publicly, then, was impractical. To avoid those financing 
conditions, the government provided nonmarketable promissory notes to Anglo, against 
which the CBIR readily advanced liquidity (Whelan 2012). As a result, in function if not form, 
the CBIR was financing government debt directly ( that is, without market intermediation). 
In essence, the fiscal cost saved by the CBIR ’s discounting of nonmarketable promissory 
notes relative to standard debt issuance woul d be the spread between the rate on the 
promissory notes and the rate that the Irish state would have obtained in the market 
(unknown, but sufficiently high for the Irish state to not even try). That said, when Anglo was 
put into resolution, the Irish stat e exchanged outstanding promissory notes with the CBIR 
for marketable floating-rate sovereign notes , thereby limiting the monetization impacts of 
the promissory note issuance. For more on the fiscal costs of the Anglo case related to ELA 
and promissory notes, see Whelan (2012). 
In October 2010, the president of the ECB wrote to the Irish minister of finance that ELA 
could be prohibited on the basis of monetary financing:  
The provision of [ELA] by the Central Bank of Ireland, as by any National Central Bank  
 
13 For non–monetary policy reasons (in which case it might not even be government debt in the first place), but 
to provide the government concessional funding costs relative to the market, or t o absorb quantities of 
government debt that markets cannot absorb. 
299
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 10 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
of the Eurosystem, is closely monitored by the ECB’s Governing Council as it may 
interfere with the objectives and tasks of the Eurosystem and the prohibition of 
monetary financing under the Treaties. (Trichet 2010a) 
The next month, the president of the E CB warned again  about lending to insolvent 
institutions as being subject to monetary financing prohibitions and conditioned further 
approval for CBIR ELA on Irish fiscal reforms and a state guarantee  of the ELA  (Trichet 
2010b).  
Denmark 2008 
In Denmark in 2008, Roskilde Bank took larger -than-expected losses and appealed to the 
Danmarks Nationalbank (DNB)  for emergency liquidity facilities. The DNB’s lending to 
Roskilde was guaranteed by both the private deposit insurer ( Private Contingency 
Association, or PCA) for the first 750 million Danish krone r (DKK) and the fiscal authority 
for any losses over DKK 750 million. While the DNB initially thought Roskilde was solvent, 
the bank fell below its statutory solvency requirement a few weeks after the  provision of 
emergency liquidity. Eventually, the PCA converted its guarantee into an equity stake when 
the bank was restructured. Monetary financing concerns were not raised by the DNB, the 
Danish government, the ECB, or the EC. Notably, this was not a c ase of ELA, given that the 
DNB was not a member of the Eurosystem. On the Roskilde case generally, see NAO (2009). 
While it appears the DNB was never officially charged with monetary financing, Danish 
authorities later said (para. 110) they “had no knowled ge of the European Central Bank’s 
strict interpretation of monetary financing rules relative to insolvent banks given that [the 
DNB’s] risk was to be covered by a state guarantee”  (NAO 2009, para. 110 ). Illustratively, 
Denmark was not a member of the euro area at the time. The EC noted that the state would 
likely bear any losses on the facility, so there would be no monetary financing concerns (to 
the extent there was incompatible State Aid, it would be in the domain of government 
competition distortion).  
Latvia 2008 
When the large Latvian bank Parex began showing signs of trouble in 2008, the Latvian 
ministry of finance provided government securities (sovereign bonds) to Parex as term 
deposits, taking loans as collateral. (These government securities were presumed to be 
standard marketable securities, unlike in the case of Anglo Irish in Ireland.) Parex was in 
turn able to use those government securities as collateral at the Bank of Latvia (BOL), 
obtaining liquidity in both Latvian lats and euros. 
In this case, the EC did not raise monetary financing concerns. As we know, these concerns 
come in two main forms: (1) a central bank’s lending to an insolvent institution; and (2) the 
more traditional monetary financing concern, the central bank ’s discounting of u nfunded 
sovereign debt. Here, the first form of monetary financing was not possible (despite Parex’s 
ultimate disposition as insolvent), as the initial and ultimate liability was to the fiscal 
authority. The second form, though, familiar from Anglo’s case,  could theoretically be 
applicable, given that Parex was able to make use of the BOL’s liquidity -provision capacity, 
300
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
specifically its ability to provide euro liquidity, on the basis of providing government 
securities as collateral. Documentation here is un clear, but again, in the absence of any 
evidence to the contrary, these securities were presumed to be standard marketable 
securities, which would explain the EC’s silence on this point. (This would not have been a 
case of ELA, given that the BOL was not a member of the Eurosystem in 2008; Latvia adopted 
the euro in 2014.) On the Parex case generally, see EC (2008). 
Cyprus 2011 
Laiki Bank—one of Cyprus’s largest banks —faced severe challenges in 2010 –2011, during 
the European sovereign debt crisis. Laiki was able to provide acceptable collateral to the ECB 
and obtain liquidity through monetary policy operations until October 2011, when  the EU 
decided to haircut Greek sovereign bonds, resulting in significant losses for Laiki. 
Throughout the rest of 2011 and through 2012,  as Laiki’s deposit outflows worsened, Laiki 
continued to rely on Central Bank of Cyprus (CBC) ELA for its funding, wi th the ELA 
eventually replacing deposit funding. In May 2012, the Cypriot government capitalized Laiki 
with an unfunded sovereign bond, becoming a majority shareholder. In June 2012, the ECB 
stopped accepting Cypriot sovereign bonds as collateral, exhausti ng Laiki’s ability to obtain 
any ECB liquidity; outstanding ECB liquidity was transferred to  the CBC ELA. As such, Laiki 
became wholly reliant on ELA from the CBC. On March 21, 2013, the ECB withdrew its 
approval for CBC ELA, requiring Laiki to repay its b orrowings in five days, and conditioned 
further approval for ELA on Cyprus’s implementing a joint EU/International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) program to ensure banking system solvency. On March 25, the CBC resolved Laiki 
through a purchase and assumption transaction involving another Cypriot bank, the Bank of 
Cyprus, and the sale of Laiki’s Greek operations. In 2017, the Bank of Cyprus —having 
undergone its own restructuring and recapitalization —repaid its outstanding ELA (the  
majority inherited from Laiki) to the  CBC. On the Laiki case generally, see  CBC (2013a) and 
Schaefer-Brown (2024). 
The CBC in 2013 issued a public statement saying that before the ECB’s March 25 prohibition, 
the ECB Governing Council had not objected to the CBC’s provision of ELA to Laiki, citing the 
CBC’s own view that Laiki was solvent despite capital shortages as a result of “the prospect 
of recapitalisation through the financial assistance programme” (CBC 2013b). The CBC then 
said that the ECB’s eventual decision to stop approving the ELA was a result of Cyprus’s 
failure to implement intended assistance packages; once the recapitalization plan was 
rejected by the Cypriot Parliament on March 15, 2013, that impending recapitalization was 
no longer reliable, and Laiki became insolvent as a result (and the ECB withdrew its consent 
for CBC ELA eight days later). This statement contained no explicit reference to the monetary 
financing prohibition. 
Documents leaked to the New York Times , however, show that monetary financing 
concerns—both with respect to ELA to an insolvent institution and to the use of an unfunded 
sovereign bond as collateral for ELA—were top of mind for ECB officials as early as 2012. A 
then-confidential document of meeting minutes from the ECB Governing Council in March 
2012 on Cypriot ELA requests cautioned continued ELA on the basis of solvency concerns: 
301
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 12 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
“information is lacking in order to verify the solvency and financial soundness of [Laiki] and 
hence its status as a counterpart for ELA . . .” (NYT 2014b). 
In an email dated July 31, 2012, just months after the recapitalization, with the subject line 
“ELA collateral,” an ECB official wrote to a CBC official on the question of using the unfunded 
sovereign bond as collateral for CBC ELA [emphasis added]:  
As illustrated by the Irish case, using special purpose government bonds as collateral, 
whether under monetary policy operations or under ELA, may raise monetary 
financing concerns and I would therefore advise to first make sure that all alternatives 
have been exhausted. (NYT 2014a) 
A few months later, in September 2012, a letter from the CBC to the president of the ECB 
shows that the ECB had req uested alternatives to CBC ELA against the unfunded sovereign 
bond [emphasis added]:  
It will be recalled that in the discussion on ELA at the Governing Council meeting on 6 
September 2012 it was decided that the Central Bank of Cyprus would report as soon as 
possible on the potential contingency liquidity measures that could increase the funding 
capacities of [Laiki] excluding the unfunded government bond issued to recapitalise 
it. (NYT 2013) 
Here again, similar to the Anglo case, two major ELA -related monetary financing concerns 
were present: first, the straightforward Article 123 prohibition on lending to insolvent firms; 
second, the “traditional” monetary financing concern related to unfunded sovereign bonds 
being discounted, without intermediation, by the central bank.  
United Kingdom 2007 
In early fall of 2007, the large UK -based bank Northern Rock was facing funding difficulties 
as the markets for short-term debt began to freeze against the backdrop of the beginning of 
the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) . On September 14, the Bank of England (BoE) announced 
that it would provide Northern Rock with emergency liquidity. When Northern Rock 
requested expanded liquidity facilities, the BoE amended the liquidity facilities on October 
9, providing unlimited liquidity against all of Northern Rock’s assets. Notably, given the risk 
this posed to the BoE and the potential insolvency of Northern Rock, the BoE obtained a fiscal 
guarantee on its lending. The government later nationalized Northern Rock, and the 
Treasury assumed the lending facilities from the BoE, at that point fully eliminating any risk 
of monetary financing. On the Northern Rock case generally, see Plenderleith (2012). 
After the October 9 amendments and fiscal guarantee, the governor of the BoE noted that the 
fiscal authority was the entity bearing the risk in the lending  (House of Commons 2008) . 
While the BoE did not explicitly note that the bank had, by October 9, become insolvent (or 
that its solvency was ambiguous), BoE leadership did not feel sufficiently guaranteed in their 
lending alone and thus requested the fiscal guarantee (which applied only to lending on the 
facilities after October 9). Notably, this was not a case of ELA, given that the BoE was not a 
member of the Eurosystem. The EC raised no monetary financing concerns. 
302
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
Spain 2009 
In Spain in 2009, the regional savings bank, or caja, Caja de A horros Castilla –La Mancha 
(CCM) faced severe challenges as the Spanish real estate market, to which it was highly 
exposed, took losses in the context of the GFC. When CCM exhausted its ECB -eligible 
collateral, it turned to the Bank of Spain (BoS)  for ELA. At first, the BoS advanced EUR 900 
million in liquidity secured against CCM’s assets. When a proposed merger later fell through, 
the BoS expanded its ELA with a credit line of up to EUR 9 billion.  
Although the BoS insisted that CCM was solvent a t the time, concurrent reporting suggests 
that one of the precipitating events in the failure of CCM’s merger with another caja was the 
determination by CCM’s auditors that the bank was insolvent and their refusal to certify 
CCM’s year-end accounts for sub mittal to the BoS. The audit report showed that CCM had 
negative equity of EUR 3 billion. The BoS, before providing the EUR 9 billion credit line, 
requested a fiscal guarantee. The government passed Royal Decree-Law 4/2009, which gave 
the fiscal authority the authorization to guarantee up to EUR 9 billion on the BoS’s lending. 
On the CCM case generally, see EC (2010). 
The BoS maintained publicly that it had lent to a solvent institution. Nonetheless, in 
testimony to parliament days after the emergency credit line extension, the governor of the 
BoS said [emphasis added]:  
The [TFEU] prevents central banks from extending an urgent provision of liquidity to an 
institution in difficulties, such as Caja Castilla La Mancha, without adequate collateral. 
Given the volumes that could be committed, the Spanish Treasury had to provide explicit 
guarantees to the issuing bank, so as not to infringe the Treaty ’s prohibition on central 
banks extending “monetary financing” to Treasuries. (Fernández Ordóñez 2009) 
This refers to the Brussels View stated earlier: monetary financing in relation to ELA is 
viewed through the lens of using mone tary resources (that is, creating reserves) in place of 
fiscal resources for “public undertakings.” Here, though, as the BoS’s governor points out, the 
fiscal authority’s guarantee of the lending ensured that any risk from advances to an 
insolvent institution was borne by the state. A review of the BoS’s handling of the CCM failure 
by the EC shed some light on how the EC thought about the lending and guarantees: Notably, 
the EC reviewed the fiscal guarantee of the BoS lending as restructuring aid, not liquidity aid, 
consistent with the view that liquidity advancement to insolvent firms is a form of 
restructuring and/or recapitalization (see [EC 2010]). Nonetheless, that restructuring aid, as 
it were, was guaranteed by the state (a “public under taking”). It is no surprise then that, 
consistent with the BoS’s lending risk residing with the fiscal authority, the EC’s State Aid 
report found no violations of the prohibition on monetary financing.  
303
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 14 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
The Case for Cooperation: The Role of Guarantees and the Fiscal 
Authority 
Fiscal Authority Guarantees: Opportunities  
As surveyed in a number of these recent case studies, one apparent solution to the monetary 
financing problem is fiscal authority guarantees. Although numerous tests and guidelines of 
varying complexity and abstraction attempt to answer the question of when, in difficult cases 
of judgment, a central bank ought to lend, central bankers themselves often do away with 
the head-scratching and obtain a fiscal guarantee.  
Indeed, the IMF has written about the use of central bank liquidity in resolution and notes 
that the proper practical safeguard against monetary financing when the line between ELA 
and resolution financing becomes blurry is the involvement of the fiscal authority [emphasis 
added]:  
ELA to a bank in resolution may need to be backed by an indemnity or a guarantee 
from the government to protect the central bank balance sheet if, for example, there is 
significant uncertainty over the (new) bank’s ability to repay. The central bank balance 
sheet should not be used for purposes other than for providing liquidity on a 
prudently collateralized basis , i.e., the  central bank should not provide capital or 
unsecured loans to a bank in resolution. (Croitoru, Dobler, and Molin 2018) 
Although the concern of this policy note is not liquidity in resolution, that state -guaranteed 
ELA is a common and accepted pathway to achieve liquidity in resolution in the EU validates 
various EU countries’ use of state guarantees of ELA when unsure if the bank is a goi ng or 
gone concern. As researchers at the economic think tank Bruegel have pointed out, the EU’s 
resolution framework leaves unclear which entity should provide liquidity to banks in 
resolution if the bank in question is sufficiently large such that its “liquidity needs . . . exceed 
the size of the [Single Resolution Fund] and its backstop ” (Demertzis et al. 2018) . As they 
point out, in  such cases, in  practice, a state guarantee of ELA is the usual path . Indeed, the 
researchers conclude that “since the ECB cannot provide liquidity to banks without 
collateral, public guarantees need to be established” (Demertzis et al. 2018).14 In their view, 
ultimately, European banking union should be completed and such guarantees would then 
be provided fully by a euro area fiscal body, but until then [emphasis added]:  
As long as banking union remains incomplete and liquidity provisioning is still to a 
significant part done by national central banks through ELA, it might be appropriate 
to continue relying on some guarantee from the respective national treasury(ies)  
combined with a larger guarantee from the [European Stability Mechanism]. (Demertzis 
et al. 2018) 
 
14 However, this i s not to characterize the authors’ proposal as being narrowly limited to national fiscal 
guarantees. The authors also suggest that, beyond one or multiple national fiscal authorities, guarantees could 
be extended by the Single Resolution Fund or the European Stability Mechanism.  
304
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
This is, of course, not to say that the only use of state -guaranteed ELA is for liquidity in 
resolution, but it is to say that attaching a fiscal guarantee to ELA allows the tool to be used 
equally as a standard-fare emergency liquidity tool for solvent banks and, just as acceptably, 
as a wind-down tool. It is therefore an attractive intervention for EU countries dealing with 
banks that are difficult to categorize as going or gone concern.  
As discussed, monetary financing is only a concern for independent central banks. As long as 
they have fiscal guarantees, centra l banks can be more agnostic to the recipient bank’s 
solvency status. Once the fiscal authority agrees to underwrite the lending, any resulting 
taxpayer losses would not be a matter of monetary financing  but rather of fiscal policy . 
Should a government dec ide that it wishes to use the fiscal resources at its disposal to 
recapitalize a bank, that is its prerogative. 
However, a number of problems remain.  
Limitations of Fiscal Guarantees 
Fiscal Guarantees as Insufficient 
There are two distinct reasons that fiscal guarantees might not be sufficient for avoiding legal 
infringement allegations in the EU.  
First, in the EU, a fiscal guarantee per se may be insufficient to avoid charges of monetary 
financing (or illegal State Aid, depending on the narrowness of one’s legal interpretation). A 
speech by ECB executive board member Yves Mersch in 2018 provides the logic [emphasis 
added]:  
In no circumstances would a guarantee “cure” the lack of financial soundness of a given 
counterparty, or the lack of collateral or a combination of the two, which is often the case 
in a resolution scenario. If a public guarantee can prevent insolvency, it is only after 
having tested its value in the markets. If a public guarantee serves to cut out t he 
markets and replace them with central bank liquidity it would contravene the 
principle of an open market economy with free competition and could be seen as 
a circumvention of the monetary financing prohibition. (Mersch 2018) 
Again, this is a State Aid question, not a monetary financing question.15 The underlying logic 
is that whether truly monetary financing or fiscal financing, if the government—in any of its 
permutations—is supplying necessary credit to an institution but not to others for an 
extended period, then this distorts competition and is effectively industrial policy à la 
finance. Industrial policy is straightforwardly outside the scope of this note. This is a State 
Aid question that EU policymakers must navigate separately.  
 
15 Although the remaining clause, “could be seen as a circumvention of the monetary financing prohibition” is 
a confounding one, and seemingly contradictory to some ECB precedent . On the one hand, this could plausibly 
refer to simply announcing a guarantee as insufficient to absolve any monetary financing concerns; on the other 
hand, the EC has effectively said that a guarantee is, at least in combination with other interventions, sufficient 
to avoid monetary financing (see the Spain-CCM and Anglo Irish case studies in this note).  
305
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 16 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
Second, and potentially more broadly applicable outside the EU, is the lesson learned from 
the Anglo Irish and Laiki Bank cases discussed in this note. Should the fiscal authority lack 
the means to credibly provide the full guarantee, and should it then rely on the monetary  
authority to buy its debt, it would be attempting to resolve one form of monetary financing 
with another. In other words, capitalizing a bank through reserve  creation is one form of 
monetary financing but backstopping that reserve  creation with what amoun ts to simply 
more reserve  creation (through direct central bank financing of unmarketable sovereign 
debt) does not resolve the inherent tension. Assuming the nation in question arrived at this 
point by virtue of exhausted fiscal space, resources would like ly need to be provided by an 
international lender of last resort.  
Fiscal Guarantees as Impractical 
Fiscal guarantees are of little use when they’re not available, and they’re not always de facto 
available for one of two common reasons: (1) the fiscal auth ority refuses to guarantee the 
lending (in which case the game is probably up); or (2) the fiscal authority in principle agrees 
directionally but with some limitations that make it impractical for it to be able to issue the 
guarantee timely enough to avoid  the failure of the institution at hand ( for example , 
requiring approval from the legislature). 
Although of course jurisdiction dependent, there may be workarounds available for this 
latter challenge. 
While not a case of bank insolvency and not in the EU, the Swiss National Bank’s (SNB ’s) 
recent experience with Credit Suisse is illustrative of the challenges of fiscal guarantees writ 
large. In that case, the SNB’s proposed ad hoc liquidity facility featured a fiscal guarantee, but 
that required parliamentary approval (SFC 2023). As regulators had no time to convene the 
legislature, the executive used an emergency authority power to bypass the legislature (such 
an executive action required ex post parliamentary approval, which it received). But while 
in S witzerland an emergency executive ordinance allowed the executive to waive the 
parliamentary approval process and order a public guarantee (and in Spain we saw similar 
authority), such standing executive authority may not exist in all legal systems.   
The particular powers vested in the executive necessary for enjoining a fiscal authority 
guarantee will vary widely by jurisdiction and are matters of political and legal norms. The 
practical upshot for authorities in crisis-fighting roles is to know those legal constraints and 
authorities ahead of time and to build emergency plans around them to avoid unnecessary 
and potentially protracted legal and political debates.  
Fiscal Guarantees as Lacking Credibility 
Fiscal guarantees are of little use if they lack cr edibility. Owing to conditions commonly 
associated with lending to potentially insolvent firms, adverse selection with respect to 
credible fiscal guarantees is likely. A common reason for a central bank to lend to a 
potentially insolvent firm is that the f irm is systemically important and therefore often —
though not always —very large relative to the financial system and/or economy. In such 
cases, the larger the size of the recipient institution relative to the size of the fiscal authority’s 
306
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
resources, the less credible a fiscal authority guarantee is. As a result, in the most systemic 
of situations, fiscal guarantees’ credibility may be at their weakest. While I am unaware of 
any instances in which a fiscal guarantee of central bank lending w as deemed to lack 
credibility, we know from existing research that fiscal guarantees in general (us ually in the 
form of bank liability guarantees) often suffer from this flaw (McNamara et al. 2022).16  
Use of Nonfiscal Authority Guarantees 
Last, while fiscal authority guarantees are the most common form of guarantee observed in 
modern financial crisis interventions, they are not the only ones. Guarantees can be issued 
by government agencies, sovereign wealth funds, deposit insurers, state-sponsored firms, or 
private firms or consortia. For legal, political economy, and administrative reasons, such 
nonfiscal authority guarantees may be attractive. For example, they can avoid lengthy 
political processes, provide positive market signaling effects, and keep risk  off the fiscal 
authority’s balance sheet. However, such guarantees may also face an uphill credibility 
battle. Further, particularly in times of systemic stress, those guarantees can be procyclical. 
For example, if a deposit insurer guarantee were called upon, the deposit insurer could be 
forced to levy an ad hoc fee on its members to fund the payout, resulting in contagion and 
systemically reducing the capital of the financial system.  
Private sector guarantees of central bank lending are most likely to t ake the form of 
guarantees issued by private deposit insurance groups or banking industry groups. 17 In the 
case of Denmark ’s Roskilde, the first tranche of the central bank emergency lending was 
guaranteed by a private deposit insurer.  
Considerations for Policymakers 
In general, central bankers and financial policymakers should be aware of the risks involved 
in the extension of emergency lending with respect to monetary financing —and should be 
mindful of solvency regulations as expressed in their own guidance (and, in the Eurosystem, 
to applicable ECB guidance). While not a substitute for collateral, and insufficient by itself to 
ensure safe harbor, a fiscal guarantee may provide some protection from monetary financing 
allegations specifically. When solvency is in question and the intervention may straddle the 
line between the standard LOLR function and restructuring and resolution liquidity, 
involvement of the fiscal authority may be prudent. In the case of depleted fiscal resources, 
recourse to a supranati onal organization ( for example, the European Stability Mechanism , 
IMF) may be necessary.  
 
16 For example, it is not hard to imagine the central bank of a small country lending to its largest domestic bank 
with a fiscal guarantee, while the nation suffers a debt or balance of payments crisis. In s uch a situation, the 
fiscal guarantee would likely lack credibility and could be counterproductive, absent international support.  
17 Up-to-date data on deposit insurance programs is difficult to come by, but World Bank data from 2013 
suggest that most deposit insurance programs for which data are available are administered either publicly or 
jointly by public and private bodies (most are funded by the private sector). However, in a minority of nations, 
they remain private. F or example, in Brazil, the Deposit Guarantee Fund  is private; in Switzerland, esisuisse, 
the national deposit insurance group, is also private.  
307
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 18 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
It is perhaps noteworthy that while the legal codification of monetary financing with respect 
to the LOLR role described at the beginning of this note is particular to the EU, the principles 
apply broadly: It is often the case, even in regimes not explicitly prohibiting the extension of 
central bank advances to insolvent entities, that those central banks take recourse to the 
fiscal authority for guarantees (variously for political insurance or balance sheet 
protection).18 Fiscal guarantees are obtained (or, at the very least, requested) with 
frequency, both within and outside the EU. In other words, while the legal motivation for 
fiscal guarantees of emergency lending is peculiar to the EU, the resulting policy intervention 
is a regular feature of emergency lending and something for which central bankers and their 
fiscal counterparts should have a “break the glass” plan.     
 
18 See, for example , the cases of an appeal for a fiscal guarantee (ultimately unsuccessful) from the Fed eral 
Reserve when lending to Bear Stearns  in 2008  (Paulson 2010) ; the fiscal guarantee for ad hoc emergency 
lending to a consortium of banks by the National Bank of Moldova in 2014 (Inquiry Commission 2019); and the 
fiscal guarantee obtained by the Swiss National Bank for one of its core emergency liquidity facilities for Credit 
Suisse in 2023 (SNB 2023).  
308
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
References 
Baudino, Patrizia, Diarmuid Murphy, and Jean-Philippe Svoronos. 2020. “The Banking Crisis 
in Ireland.” FSI Crisis Management Series, No. 2, October 27, 2020.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/10507 
Central Bank of Cyprus (CBC). 2013a. “Rescue Programme for Laiki Bank.” Press release, 
March 30, 2013.  
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2057 
———. 2013b. “Provision of Emergency Liquidity Assistance to the Two Largest Cypriot 
Banks.” Press release, June 17, 2013.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5340 
Commission of Inquiry for the Elucidation of All the Circumstances of the Bankruptcy of the 
Banking System in the Republic of Moldova and the Investigation of Bank Fraud (Inquiry 
Commission). 2019. “Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Bank Fraud and the 
Bankruptcy of the Banking System in the Republic of Moldova.” Parliamentary Commission 
Report, October 17, 2019 (in Romanian).  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2421 
Croitoru, Oana, Marc Dobler, and Jonah Molin. 2018. “Resolution Funding: Who Pays When 
Financial Institutions Fail?” IMF Technical Notes and Manuals No. 18/01, June 2018. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5475 
Demertzis, Maria, Inês Gonçalves Raposo, Pia Hüttl, and Guntram Wolff. 2018. “How to 
Provide Liquidity to Banks after Resolution in Europe’s Banking Union.” Bruegel Policy 
Contribution No. 21, November 2018.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5335 
European Central Bank (ECB). 2013. “ELA Procedures,” October 17, 2013. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/12957 
———. 2017. “Agreement on Emergency Liquidity Assistance,” May 17, 2017. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5341 
———. 2024. “Agreement on Emergency Liquidity Assistance,” September 27, 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5342 
European Commission (EC). 2008. “State Aid – NN 68/2008 – Latvia Public Support 
Measures to JSC Parex Banka,” November 24, 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/1298 
———. 2010. “State Aid NN 61/2009 – Spain – Rescue and Restructuring of Caja Castilla-La 
Mancha,” June 29, 2010.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/3840 
309
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 20 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
———. 2013. “Communication from the Commission on the Application, from 1 August 
2013, of State Aid Rules to Support Measures in Favour of Banks in the Context of the 
Financial Crisis (‘Banking Communication’).” No. 2013/216/01, July 30, 2013. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5344 
———. n.d. “Types of EU Law.” Accessed February 27, 2025. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5339 
European Union (EU). 2009. “Protocol (No. 4) on the Statute of the European System of 
Central Banks and of the European Central Bank.” January 1, 2009. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/731 
——— 2012. “Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union.” No. 2012/326/47, October 26, 2012. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-
documents2/5343 
———. 2018. “Summary of Treaty on European Union.” April 4, 2018. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5338 
———. 2024. “Soft Law.” European Industrial Relations Dictionary, November 28, 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5337 
Fernández Ordóñez, Miguel. 2009. “Appearance before the Commission of Economy and 
Finance of the Congress of Deputies.” April 2, 2009 (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/3853 
Goodhart, C.A.E. 1999. “Myths about the Lender of Last Resort.” International Finance 2, no. 
3 (November): 339–60. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5336 
Gortsos, Christos. 2024. “Lending of Last Resort (LLR) to Credit Institutions in the Euro 
Area under the Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) Mechanism: Status Quo and 
Proposed Amendments.” European Banking Institute Working Paper Series No. 185, 
November 25, 2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5486/ 
Honohan, Patrick. 2010. “The Irish Banking Crisis Regulatory and Financial Stability Policy 
2003-2008.” Report to the Minister for Finance by the Governor of the Central Bank, May 
31, 2010.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/730/ 
House of Commons Treasury Committee (House of Commons). 2008. “The Run on the 
Rock.” Fifth Report of Session 2007–08, Volume I, January 24, 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14251/ 
310
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
McNamara, Christian M., Carey K. Mott, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2022. “Blanket 
Guarantees Survey.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4: 103–32. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/4 
Mersch, Yves. 2018. “The Limits of Central Bank Financing in Resolution.” Speech delivered 
at the IMFS Distinguished Lecture Series, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany, January 
30, 2018.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/3842 
National Audit Office (NAO). 2009. “Report to the Public Accounts Committee on the Danish 
Financial Supervisory Authority’s Activities in Relation to Roskilde Bank A/S.” June 2009. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/1061 
New York Times (NYT). 2013. “Letter from Central Bank of Cyprus to E.C.B.” 2013. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4723 
———. 2014a. “E.C.B. Advice on Cyprus Bank.” October 2014. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4718 
———. 2014b. “Minutes from E.C.B. Meeting on Cyprus Liquidity.” October 2014. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4714 
Paulson, Henry M., Jr. 2010. On the Brink: Inside the Race to Stop the Collapse of the Global 
Financial System. New York: Business Plus, Hachette Book Group. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/8332 
Plenderleith, Ian. 2012. “Review of the Bank of England’s Provision of Emergency Liquidity 
Assistance in 2008–09.” Presented to the Court of the Bank of England, October 2012. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/8450 
Schaefer-Brown, Stella. 2024. “Cyprus: Laiki Bank and Bank of Cyprus Restructuring, 2013.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 1: 123–49.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss1/5/ 
Swiss Federal Council (SFC). 2023. “Ordinance on Additional Liquidity Assistance Loans 
and the Granting of Federal Default Guarantees for Liquidity Assistance Loans from the 
Swiss National Bank to Systemically Important Banks.” March 16, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4395 
Swiss National Bank (SNB). 2023. “Financial Stability Report 2023.” June 22, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/3746 
Trichet, Jean-Claude. 2010a. Letter from the ECB President to Brian Lenihan, Irish Minister 
of Finance, October 15, 2010.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/972 
311
ELA and Monetary Financing in the European Union Arnold

--- Page 22 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
———. 2010b. Letter to Brian Lenihan, Irish Minister of Finance, November 19, 2010. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4488 
Whelan, Karl. 2012. “ELA, Promissory Notes and All That: The Fiscal Costs of Anglo Irish 
Bank.” University College Dublin, September 2012.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4490 
 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
 
 
312
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2