--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Mark Branson Lessons Learned: Mark Branson 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Mark Branson," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 2, 
359-362. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1660 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/14 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss2/14

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Mark Branson 
By Mercedes Cardona  
Mark Branson joined the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA) as head of the 
banking division in 2010, during the European Sovereign Debt Crisis. He became deputy 
director of FINMA in 2013 and was named director a year later. Although Switzerland is not a 
member of the European Union (EU) or its banking union, the nation participates in bilateral 
agreements that govern trade with the EU, its largest trading partner. In the wake of the Global 
Financial Crisis (GFC), it enacted a number of regulations to improve oversight of the financial 
sector. Branson left FINMA in 2021 to become head of the Federal Financial Supervisory 
Authority of Germany  (BaFin). Then–Finance Minister Olaf Scholtz (later German y’s 
chancellor) charged Branson with giving B aFin “more bite ” and restoring trust in German 
financial supervision. This “Lesson Learned” is based on an interview with Branson held in April 
2024; the full transcript may be found here. 
Supervisors should be assertive and probing . Regulators should not be afraid to 
enforce standards and make changes when needed. 
For the Swiss government, one of the lessons of the  GFC was the need for more assertive 
bank supervision, said Branson. FINMA was only a year old in 2010 when Branson joined 
from UBS, itself an institution that suffered during the GFC from a significant exposure to the 
US subprime loan market . FINMA’s chal lenge was to fundamentally change the nature of 
bank supervision in Switzerland, “to completely rebuild the way banking supervision was 
done, through a much more active and intrusive and well -resourced way of going about it ,” 
said Branson.  
One of the lessons, and I think this is not unique to Switzerland, was that prior to that 
financial crisis, there had been too much trust in banks’ own risk management 
abilities and risk models. Supervision had been too desk  based and too trusting and 
too little intrusive. I think that’s a conclusion that was made right across the financial 
industry. 
One of the things to do at the time when the institution was young was to completely 
rebuild the way banking supervision was done, through a much more active and 
intrusive and well-resourced way of going about it. That was one challenge, to change 
the nature and style of supervision. 
A robust exercise of supervision and drawing the right policy con clusions are two more 
important lessons drawn from the G FC, Branson explained. The more active Swiss 
supervisory regime was not as thoroughly tested during the European Sovereign Debt Crisis 
that followed, since Switzerland was not a member of the European common market, but the 
additional transparency and information helped the authorities assess the exposure of banks 
to the troubled sovereign assets. The COVID-19 pandemic proved to be a test of the resiliency 
of the system, explained Branson, which held thanks to the release of large capital buffers 
359

--- Page 4 ---
and fiscal support among the large European economies that neutralized the financial risk of 
the lockdowns. 
In addition, the “too big to fail” problem was more pronounced in Switzerland than in other 
countries, said Branson , because of the concentration of its banking sector  in two 
institutions, UBS and Credit Suisse.  (In 2020, the se banks collectively held approximately 
80% of the country ’s banking assets .) That meant that the  failure of a large bank in 
Switzerland posed a greater risk to the Swiss financial system and economy than a failure of 
a similarly sized bank in most other countries.  Branson said that Switzerland addressed its 
“too big to fail” risks swiftly following the GFC—even before the United States enacted its 
landmark Dodd-Frank reforms—when the Swiss parliament introduced legislation 
mandating new leverage ratio requirement s and much higher capital standards, including 
contingent capital instruments for resolution.  This regime was tested in 2023, when Credit 
Suisse failed and was acquired by UBS with assistance from the Swiss government.  
Branson also shared a related impression from his time at Germany’s BaFin: the perception 
that regulation is the enemy of innovation , which is often invoked to counter calls for 
stronger supervision. While at BaFin , he helped the German agency rebuild its reputation 
after the payments processor Wirecard collapsed in a fraud case that Branson compared to 
the 2002 Enron Corp.  scandal in the US. Th e Wirecard  case led to significant r egulatory 
changes regarding corporate governance and accountability standards. Branson helped  to 
rebuild confidence in the German supervisory regime.  
It was a question first and foremost of rebuilding the reputation and of recalibrating 
the appetite to a ct decisively, fast and courageously in situations which needed 
intervention, to become more interventionist. In the end, there was no dilemma 
because this had obviously shown up  as a weakness in the system. The political 
imperative was to reestablish the reputation of BaFin as a strong, effective, and 
intrusive supervisor, and that has not wavered to this day. 
Such changes, said Branson, do not operate against innovation, but instead, good supervision 
actually promotes sustainable innovation. 
You can only have successful innovation in your financial center if that’s done on the 
basis of your innovators sticking to the rules. Having a clean and innovative financial 
sector is not in contradiction , and it is the only way you can sustainably build 
something. 
Branson said that the preventive aspects of regulation are crucial: “You are never done with 
improving the preventive part of financial market regulation.” 
After a crisis , it is important to address any weaknesses or gaps that have been 
identified in supervisory processes so you will be better prepared for the next crisis.  
The work of financial market s regulation is never done, and as the experience of the crisis 
passes, the more difficult it  becomes to find the political will to enact needed corrective 
regulations, said Branson. He advised making needed changes in the immediate aftermath of 
360
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
the crisis when memories were fresh. As an example, he pointed to the European framework 
for banking re gulation, which he characterized as  still incomplete, as it relates to banking 
resolution and liquidity requirements. The failure to “Europeanize” the banking system, 
especially deposit insurance, is an obvious gap in policy, he explained.  
Still, much of the work done since the GFC has proved effective, Branson said: 
The pulses of turbulence that we’ve had in the banking system since and over the last 
few years, none of them have turned truly systemic because most of the individual 
institutions are much more robust than they were, and the interconnections between 
them are much better managed. 
While we’ve had sporadic issues, which have been quite severe in individual markets 
or sets of institutions, we haven’t had anything that you could really describe as fully 
systemic or not containable with rapid action. I think that ’s why we have to be very 
careful now to make sure that we preserve those gains in strength of the prudential 
regulatory system on solvency and capital, and that we complete the job of Basel III, 
and we make sure we don’t dial back any of the new calibration that has been reached. 
Crises are moving faster: Be prepared and act fast. 
The speed at which information and transactions move across the global economy continues 
to ramp up, and every crisis seems to move faster than the one before. Technology continues 
to change the way and the speed at which financial services are deployed . Branson noted 
that, in a very connected world, where supply chains, clients, and operations are global and 
politics changes dramatically, “you can end up in uncomfortable situations from a risk 
perspective.” 
In an unfolding crisis, people tend to protect their positions and think of how their decisions 
will look in the future, rather than focus on the immediate solution, said Branson. But 
leadership requires taking the risk of making an unpopular decision under severe time 
pressure.  
It’s best to  keep a clear head, focus on the few essential factors , and bring the other key 
decision makers along, Branson said: 
The most critical thing is to make sure that there are extremely good connections 
between the relevant decision makers because you ’re never alone as a supervisory 
authority in a crisis. You have a central bank, you have a finance ministry, y ou have 
maybe other international partners. 
One of the most important things is to make sure that all the materially important 
players are involved as early as possible in what the scenarios may be and what their 
roles may be. Then make sure that you lead people through that process in as calm 
and measured a fashion as possible. Because in an approaching crisis or in a crisis, 
many people tend to lose their heads quite quickly. So, try to make sure that you act 
361
Lessons Learned: Mark Branson Cardona

--- Page 6 ---
on the basis of secured information, and calmly. Then be prepared to be decisive and 
to intervene and to show leadership. 
Dated: June 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022–36 
362
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2