--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Ignazio Angeloni Lessons Learned: Ignazio Angeloni 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Ignazio Angeloni," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 2, 
356-358. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1659 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/13 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss2/13

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Ignazio Angeloni 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Ignazio Angeloni was an adviser on financial integration, financial stability , and monetary 
policy to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank during the European Sovereign 
Debt Crisis and later became director general of financial stability. He coordinated the 
preparations for establishing the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) , a component of the 
European banking union. The SSM was created to address macroprudential gaps identified 
during the Global Financial Crisis and the Sovereign Debt Crisis. Angeloni has advocated in his 
academic papers  for completing the work of the SSM by establishing a regional deposit 
insurance scheme that would backstop the work of the related Single Resolution Board of the 
European banking union, as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp oration does in the United 
States. This Lesson Learned is based on an interview with Angeloni; the full transcript may be 
found here. 
To be best positioned to address a financial crisis, a banking system needs a fully built 
regional framework of supervision and resolution.   
The European Central Bank (ECB) acted quickly to provide liquidity as the Global Financial 
Crisis (GFC) ground on, feeling protected by the limited exposure of European economies to 
the downturn in the US subprime mortgage market. But “ that complacent feeling lasted 
little,” said Angeloni, as the GFC morphed into the Sovereign Debt Crisis in 2010.  
In Greece, public debt endangered the health of banks, while in I reland, the banking crisis 
endangered the public finance sector. A new term entered the lexicon , Angeloni explained , 
the so-called “doom loop,” a vicious cycle of contagion that spread from the public sector to 
the banking sector and back, across national economies—later including the larger 
economies of Italy and Spain—and eventually threatening the stability of the euro.  
The crises exposed the need to address gaps in the European Union’s banking supervision 
framework, which the EU attempted to address by  launching the SSM to centralize banking 
supervision, regulation, and crisis management  across its member states . This required a 
legislative effort to create the tools and bureaucratic staffing necessary —ECB staff grew by 
more than 1,000 people in a matter of months, Angeloni recalled.  
The European banking union needs three strong pillars  to prevent panic and doom loops , 
argued Angeloni: supervision with supporting legislation; resolution and crisis management; 
and deposit insurance. The EU reacted soundly to the sovereign crisis, but that resolve has 
weakened with time, leaving some key elements of the crisis management framework 
incomplete, Angeloni explained.  
Ex post, not all these elements have seen the lig ht. The supervision has been up and 
running since November 2014. The urgent priority dictated at the time by the crisis 
generated sufficient political pressure to implement it quickly. As soon as the crisis 
356

--- Page 4 ---
subsided, however—also due to the fact that in the meantime supervision was doing 
its job well—the political incentives to set up the remaining parts waned. 
The EU has a resolution authority but still lacks the technical and financial instruments (such 
as a strong regional deposit insurance program) that  would allow the SSM to act as 
effectively as the FDIC in the US, Angeloni explained. Bank resolution and supervision are 
also divided in the EU, with supervision handled by the ECB across all the regions ’ banks, 
while resolution is only handled at the European level for the largest banks, leaving smaller 
banks to be liquidated at the regional level, usually at the taxpayers’ expense. In addition, the 
Single Resolution Board in Brussels has adopted a doctrine of only intervening if there is a 
serious public interest. 
In the experience of the last 10 years, banks “in life” are supervised by Europe, but 
when they “die” they’re liquidated back at home, with national resources. Incentives 
are not aligned: there is a European supervisor, according to European principles and 
European legislation, but when the bank fails, it’s the national taxpayer that is on the 
hook.  
Angeloni argued that  the prospect for overhauling that process is unclear, especially as 
nationalistic governments take power in more European countries, and the results of the 
2024 European Parliament elections change the political landscape. With statutory changes 
requiring a unanimous vote of all 27 members, some measures may be curtailed. Angeloni 
noted how Italy, now under a far-right administration, blocked a treaty that would allow the 
ESM to provide a financial backstop to the Single Resolution Fund, similar to the backstop 
provided to the FDIC by the US Treasury.  
The problem can be solved if the resolution authority in Brussels takes on more 
responsibility to resolve or liquidate all banks supervised in Europe. And having more 
instruments, more resources to resolve the banks and being more active, more 
proactive and more powerful, very much following the model of the FDI C in 
Washington, which is a very good organization, very professional. A year ago , the 
European Commission has proposed a legislation package that moves some steps in 
this direction, but approval will take time. 
The European banking union is still the same  as it was in the wake of the Sovereign Debt 
Crisis 10 years ago. As Angeloni concluded,  
We underestimated that, in spite of making the banking sector stronger, the single 
market for banking products and services in Europe would not automatically jump -
start. We implicitly took that for granted, but it did not happen. More work needs to 
be done. Specific provisions must be put in place to help the banks invest more across 
borders. The banking sector in Europe is still fragmented, overbanked, and inefficient. 
Today, this is the new frontier for banking regulation in Europe. 
In any crisis, authorities should be decisive but flexible. It helps to have built some 
policy space beforehand.  
357
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
The EU’s actions to manage the crises of the early 2010s left European banking in a stronger 
position when the COVID -19 pandemic shut down the region’s economies and threatened 
the eurozone. No eurozone banks failed during the pandemic or the banking turmoil in early 
2023 that resulted in bank failures in the US and Switzerland. 
The EU’s COVID measures —which included relaxing capital and liquidity requirements, 
encouraging banks to use th eir macroprudential  buffers, and directing banks to suspend 
dividend payments—were very effective in providing stability during the crisis. Exiting these 
measures was complicated, but  the pandemic supervisory measures were phased out by 
early 2022. Angeloni reflected on the two primary lessons from Europe’s back -to-back 
crises: be prepared for the crisis ahead of time, and respond to it quickly and decisively when 
it arrives:  
The lesson from any crisis is twofold. First of all, you have to have policy space at the 
outset. This means building  up and maintaining safety margins in good or normal 
times. With regard to banks, this means being in a comfortable situation with regards 
to capital, liquidity, a clean balance sheet with safety margins, et  cetera. In simple 
words, be ready for when the crisis comes. For the euro area, that was actually the 
case in 2019, before COVID, because a fter five years of single supervision, the banks 
had been significantly strengthened. When COVID hit, euro area banks were much 
stronger than they used to be earlier on. 
Second, the policy response to the crisis must be prompt and decisive. In the case of 
the supervisory response to COVID-19, that meant forbearance. Forbearance is a bad 
thing normally, but it is a vital temporary response against a crisis in which healthy 
banks are hit by an adverse shock threatening their viability. While forbearance is 
applied, an eye should be kept to the exit strategy. How easy will it be to take those 
measures out when no longer needed? The exit strategy is important because, as I just 
mentioned, one must always be ready for the next crisis. Another crisis will always 
come, this is certain, although neither its nature nor its timing can be foreseen. 
Dated: June 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2024–01 
 
 
358
Lessons Learned: Ignazio Angeloni Cardona