--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 3 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Stijn Claessens Lessons Learned: Stijn Claessens 
Owen Heaphy 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Heaphy, Owen (2025) "Lessons Learned: Stijn Claessens," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 3, 84-88. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1668 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss3/4 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss3/4

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Stijn Claessens 
By Owen Heaphy 
After two decades at the World Bank, Stijn Claessens served as assistant director in the research 
department of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) from 2007 to 2014. From 2015 to early 
2017, Claessens was senior adviser in the Division of International Finance at the Federal 
Reserve Board (Fed), before joining the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) as head of 
financial stability policy and deputy head of the monetary and economic department in 2017. 
Claessens left the BIS in September 2023 and is now an executive fellow with the Yale Program 
for Financial Stability. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview held in November 2024; 
the full transcript may be found here. 
Governments in emerging market economies should closely monitor how they access 
foreign financing and their balance of payments to avoid creating risks to the financial 
stability of their banking systems and broader economies. 
Historically, for many emerging ma rket economies, external financing in pursuit of growth 
has been a double -edged sword. Policies in pursuit of economic growth can lead to 
multifaceted crises if a balance of payments crisis spills over and affects a country’s banking 
system. In the relatively low interest rate environment during the commodities boom of the 
1970s, many emerging markets experienced periods of economic growth that were financed 
by lending from foreign creditors. However, during the early 1980s, the Volcker interest rate 
shock, an aggressive policy of dramatically increasing interest rates to combat high inflation, 
triggered major balance of payments crises for many of these countries, with interest rates 
peaking above 20%.  
Claessens noted: 
For many emerging market countries, being open to foreign capital flow is a mixed 
blessing. On one hand, they need external financing because they want to grow. At the 
same time, they’re introducing shocks or importing volatility from a global 
perspective. 
The 1980s balance of payments crises, although fiscal in nature, often resulted in banking 
crises as well. Banks borrowed in foreign currency and, when there was foreign exchange 
rate depreciation, found that they lacked sufficient foreign assets to meet their liabilities. 
Regarding the interconnectivity of fiscal and banking crises, Claessens explained: 
You may have a balance o f payments crisis, which is perhaps linked to a sovereign 
crisis, meaning the country can’t pay on the fiscal side. That in turn triggers financial 
stress that sometimes becomes a banking crisis. The solution is then actually quite 
complicated, because you must solve all these things at the same time. 
84

--- Page 4 ---
Part of the reason emerging mar ket economies are more prone to these “triple crises,” said 
Claessens, is because of their fiscal constraints. In advanced economies, fiscal authorities can 
typically finance the restructuring of distressed banks in local currency debt without 
triggering a mac roeconomic fiscal crisis. Conversely, emerging economies often lack the 
fiscal resources to do so (as was the case during the 1980s and 1990s). Therefore, they end 
up requiring conditional lending from international organizations like the IMF. 
Claessens al so noted that the IMF is developing the integrated policy framework, a 
systematic approach to assist countries in selecting an appropriate policy mix for managing 
large and volatile capital flows and more generally preserving macroeconomic and financial 
stability in the face of domestic and external shocks. The framework re cognizes the 
interactions between different vulnerabilities and policy tools (monetary policy, exchange 
rate management, macroprudential measures, and capital flow management measures) and 
acknowledges that the appropriate policy mix depends on the nature of shocks, country 
characteristics, and initial conditions. 
The framework does not replace the IMF’s earlier policy of broad liberalization of trade, 
capital flows, and privatization but adds nuance and allows more flexibility tailored to the 
country’s particular circumstances: 
Fault is a big word, but one lesson we learned from the liberalization experiences is 
that if you completely liberalize both domestically and externally, you set yourself up 
for a crisis very quickly thereafter. Asia was an example o f that. There were even 
worse examples in Chile in the early ’70s and Mexico in the early ’90s. Mexico 
liberalized capital flows and within three years there was a major crisis where the 
banking system went completely under. 
For new countries, foreign bank ing may be necessitated by domestic capacity 
limitations. However, policymakers should be aware of the limitations and risks of an 
overreliance on foreign banking without local subsidiaries. 
Following geopolitical shifts like decolonization and the end of the Soviet Union, newly 
independent nations often sought to restructure their banking systems with support from 
the IMF and the World Bank. In recalling his time at the World Bank assisting with banking 
system restructuring efforts across Eastern Europe, Claessens explained how the limitations 
of domestic banking sectors led to an influx of foreign banks: 
Those [restructuring] models were interesting because we figured out that the 
sequence really matters. You have to do the enterprise sector first and then the banks. 
Now, the banks have a role in the meantime: to be the hard budget constraints and to 
keep loans to the enterprise sector from not exploding again. And can you restructure 
the banks on your own? Well, it turned out to be a very difficult proposition, because 
the local institutional capacity and personnel were missing to run the bank, so the 
only solution was typically to sell the bank to foreigners. 
However, Claessens cautions that overreliance on cross -border foreign banking —without 
the presence of a local subsidiary—poses separate financial stability risks. He elaborated: 
85
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
You can do foreign banking in the cross -border sense . . . or you can have a foreign 
bank set up a local subsidiary and that local subsidiary gives loans to the corporations 
in that market. I think the first is a more volatile source of funding. There’s not such a 
commitment to the lending . . . . Today, more of lending is through local subsidiaries, 
so they have a greater stake in the country. Actually, the local profitability w as often 
quite large as well, so they wanted to stay committed at least if shocks were not too 
large. Of course, if you have a major shock, political or otherwise, they may pull out, 
but that’s less likely the norm once they have set up a subsidiary. 
Institutional capacity can be a major constraint for central banks in new nations. As a 
result, these governments should take advantage of IMF and World Bank initiatives 
aimed at improving domestic capacity and promoting central bank independence. 
Capacity building is a key long -term priority for the IMF and the World Bank. In 1999, the 
two institutions launched a joint program, the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), 
to periodically assess the soundness of member countries’ financial sectors. FSAP repor ts 
include stress testing, reviews of banking supervision, and personnel and regulations 
diagnostics.  
In reference to his work for the World Bank on FSAP reports and the breakdown of 
responsibilities between the IMF and World Bank, Claessens recalled: 
I did a few cases like that for the World Bank, and it was very rewarding. The other 
side really appreciates the input. The World Bank tends to take the financial 
development and inclusion aspects. The IMF tends to take the monetary and financial 
stability an gles, although they have, in the last 20 years, taken on more on the 
supervisory side as well, so it overlaps in part with the World Bank.  
Particularly for central banks in new countries, improvements in institutional capacity also 
play an important role in promoting central bank independence. Claessens remarked: 
Once the people understand the technicalities, they also become better at making the 
central bank independent, not through the laws in place, but just through doing the 
right thing at the right time. I think this is always the best way to do it. The [banking] 
law is only valid up to some point, but if you show the people that you add “value” and 
do the right thing, you gain credibility and independence in a real sense.  
Although bilateral swap lines and precautionary liquidity lines serve an important 
role in the global financial safety net, these arrangements are limited and hard for 
emerging markets to access. As a result, these countries should consider regional 
agreements and work with international bodies to design more accessible liquidity 
programs.  
During the Global Financial Crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic, the Fed increased the number 
of swap lines it extended to other central banks to enhance the provision of d ollar liquidity. 
In March 2020, the Fed entered into swap agreements with nine countries, in addition to its 
86
Lessons Learned: Stijn Claessens Heaphy

--- Page 6 ---
standing swap arrangements with five other major central banks.1 These new arrangements 
were temporary, expiring in December 2021. Claessens commented on the Fed’s swap lines 
during COVID-19: 
I think it’s a useful tool, but it is limited by definition to those major countries. There’s 
a little bit of spillover, but I w ouldn’t overdo it. When you transfer money from one 
central bank to another, you’re getting into the second layer of risk and so on. So, then 
you’re back to regional agreements, which are already in place.  
Claessens also spoke about another Fed liquidity program. Launched in March 2020, during 
severe strains in the US Treasury market resulting from the pandemic, the FIMA Repo 
Facility2 permits eligible countries to exchange their Treasuries for dollar liquidity. The Fed 
made the facility permanent in July  2021. Claessens commented on the intentional design 
limitations in the FIMA Repo Facility, hinting at its unsuitability for most emerging markets:  
You need to have reserves in the forms of US Treasuries. . . . I think [the repo is] a 
week max. It was only overnight, but then it became a week. What you would like to 
see is a bit of a longer period, but I think it’s not realistic to expect the Fed to do so, 
because they don’t want to be repo-ing every other country in the world. 
Claessens also noted that co ncerns regarding stigma often discourage emerging market 
economies from using liquidity facilities specifically designed with them in mind, such as the 
Short-Term Liquidity Line (SLL), which the IMF launched in 2020.3 
You mentioned . . . the contingent liquidity facilities. That was already a debate at the 
IMF when I was there, some 15 years ago. It’s the usual problem. It’s not that 
dissimilar to a discount window, with the same questions of stigma. When they were 
setting up the precautionary  lines and the flexible credit lines, they had to think 
through how to make these lines available to countries, without their usage being 
taken as a sign that a country was weak. 
In 2023, the IMF conducted a review of its precautionary liquidity mechanisms, which found 
the SLL attractive to member countries (despite low usage) because of several design 
features that sought to minimize stigma. Following this review, the IMF made changes to the 
SLL aimed at improving accessibility, increasing the access limit to 200% of a country’s quota 
and permitting its concurrent use with other IMF liquidity lines.  
 
1 For the full list, see Benjamin Hoffner. 2023. “United States: Central Bank Swaps to 14 Countries, 2020. ” 
Journal of Financial Crises 5, no. 1, 509–31. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol5/iss1/21. 
2 For more information regarding the FIMA Repo Facility, see Steven Kelly. 2023. “United States: FIMA Repo 
Facility, 2020.” Journal of Financial Crises 5, no. 1, 558–79. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-
financial-crises/vol5/iss1/23. 
3 For more information regarding the SLL, see Carey K. Mott and Léo Brougher. 2024. “International Monetary 
Fund: Short-term Liquidity Line, 2020.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 4, 82–115. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss4/3. 
87
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
Dated: October 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2025–01  
88
Lessons Learned: Stijn Claessens Heaphy