--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Lessons Learned: J. Christopher Flowers Lessons Learned: J. Christopher Flowers 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Chute Lynch, Mary Anne (2025) "Lessons Learned: J. Christopher Flowers," Journal of Financial Crises: 
Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 711-714. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1639 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/29 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/29

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
J. Christopher Flowers 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
J. Christopher Flowers has been m anaging director, CEO, and chairman of the private 
investment firm J.C. Flowers & Co. LLC for many years. During the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) 
of 2007–2009, Flowers was involved with investing in some of the largest banks and financial 
institutions in the world and advising and consulting with them on possible acquisitions, 
mergers, and sales  as several of these firms began to collapse . In the fall of 2008, Flowers 
worked closely with the Bank of America (BofA) on proposals to acquire Lehman Brothers and 
Merrill Lynch, and he developed a plan for private investors to help bail  out American 
International Group (AIG). He negotiated directly with lending banks , federal regulators, and 
Treasury officials. This summary is based on an interview with Flowers in June 2022; the full 
transcript can be accessed here. 
Regulators’ focus on eliminating too -big-too-fail institutions is misguided.  In a crisis, 
governments must do what it takes to save the system. 
J. Christopher Flowers’s takeaway after the GFC was that eliminating “too big to fail” firms is 
not reasonable in today’s system of large , interconnected global financial institutions. He is 
in favor of regulations that strengthen banks internally, such as capital and liquidity 
requirements, and believes positive changes have been impl emented since the GFC, 
However, he also believes that the government must stand as the ultimate backstop  to the 
system, if necessary: 
I don’t think there’s a whole lot of doubt that if the United States government had not 
intervened [in 2008], all these companies—not all, basically, AIG, yes, Morgan Stanley, 
yes, Goldman Sachs —all would have gone bankrupt, and BofA and JPMorgan would 
have been left standing. But the damage would have been tremendous. Everybody in 
the world does business with these c ompanies, everybody —widows, orphans, 
retirees. It would be a catastrophe.  There is no doubt that declaring them all too  big 
to fail was the correct decision at that point. And it probably would have been correct 
not to let Lehman go either. 
. . . The idea that nothing’s too big to fail is complete nonsense. It never was achievable. 
It hasn’t been achieved now, and it will not be achievable in the foreseeable future . 
There’s absolutely no way in the world that the biggest financial institutions in the 
world could go down. No way. It would be such a catastrophe. And it ’s the same in 
2008 as it is true in 2022. 
. . . The point I’m driving at is part of the legislative and regulatory change since 2008 
has been to strengthen the system, but also, in theory, to el iminate the concept of 
institutions being too big to fail, and in some cases, by trying to make rules which do 
not permit the bailout. An example of that—if you look at the eurozone and you look 
at the sovereign credits of weak credits like Italy, or let ’s say Greece, in theory, the 
711

--- Page 4 ---
[European Central Bank] is not allowed to do anything to help a failing sovereign 
credit in the eurozone. But, in fact, they do, because they have to. 
According to Flowers, this is not a concept limited to the United States. He asserted that, in a 
crisis, those governments that can will help their key financial institutions  to save their 
systems. “If it came to it, there is no way the United States would  let JPMorgan fail, or the 
Bank of America or Wells Fargo or AIG, or any of these companies. And the same with 
Deutsche Bank . T hat’s a German promise there ; that’s just the way it is.” Flowers saw a 
similar phenomenon play out across the eurozone with the financial stability of countries.  
Regulatory changes enacted after the GFC prepared banks to withstand the effects of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, but additional reforms are still needed. 
Flowers credits the regulations implemented after 2008 with preventing a severe economic 
crisis during the C OVID-19 pandemic. He also noted that the government and the Federal 
Reserve were quicker to implement solutions: “The government was much more [on it], and 
the Federal Reserve was much more on it, faster and preventive, because COVID could have 
been another existential thing, and that didn’t happen.” 
However, o n the topic of regulations, Flowers thinks more work needs to be done  to 
streamline the number of US regulatory agencies overseeing banking, a burdensome 
structure compared with those of other nations that have one regulator. 
Regulations require better capital and liquidity, and that’s been good; that regulation 
is producin g better results. The regulators have done a number of other technical 
things like net clearing, and swaps, a bunch of stuff to make it better. I applaud that. I 
think that’s been positive. There is also . . . bureaucratic nonsense that comes with a 
regulatory system. That ’s true in every country, certainly true in the United States. 
For example, if you take the regulation of banks, the Federal Reserve, the OCC, the 
FDIC, and the state banking departments, and there’s Fannie Mae and there’s Freddie 
Mac and the FHA, and there is the SEC and CFTC. There are 20 different people often 
on the same subject , telling the recipient what to do. And while they ’re doing that, 
sending a hundred people over there and charging them for it. Is that really a good 
idea? Most countries do not have this preposterous duplication. In England you’ve got 
one of them. In Japan, you’ve got one of them. In America, you’ve got 10 of them, and 
it’s not really a better system.  
The government’s stake in housing mortgages i s another area where Flowers said reform 
could improve stability of the system. He pointed out that fundamental shifts in mortgage 
finance that preceded and were exacerbated by the GFC have left the system vulnerable and 
with more of this type of risk relative to other nations. “We’re the only ones with this system, 
in which the government is essentially taking a huge portion of the risk,” Flowers said.  
Take England, the Netherlands, Canada, Japan—it’s common to have a national body, 
which, to some extent , supports basic mortgage lending . B ut the overwhelming 
dominance of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, et cetera, is unusual. Secondly, [in] most 
712
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
other countries, you make the loan, you service the loan, you own the loan. You ’re a 
bank in America, none of that happens.  
Flowers pointed to c rypto as another area of weakness. Saying it is underregulated, he 
equated it to gambling in Las Vegas. But he ended on a hopeful note, quoting former Treasury 
Secretary Larry Summers: 
The financial system is like cars. You’re going to have car crashes. You’re not going to 
stop that, but we can make cars better, so that we don ’t have as many crashes and 
people are not going to get injured as much. And that ’s the same idea in the finance 
system. There ’s not going t o be someone that ’s going to stop crises and all that, 
because they’re going to happen, but you can make them less damaging. I think a lot 
of good work has been done on that since 2008. 
Industry also learns from crises. The best firms make changes reflecting those lessons. 
Flowers’s company was deeply involved in  a number of critical deals during the GFC , 
including “looking at Lehman as a principal with BofA  . . . looking at AIG as a principal with 
other partners, and . . . working with BofA as an adviser on Merrill Lynch.” He acknowledged, 
“from an investment point of view, both defense and offense, we made a variety of mistakes 
in 2008, and we wouldn’t make them twice.” He pointed out that the company had suffered 
losses during the GFC, but that it had also learned some practical lessons that had led to 
changes in how it operated. He shared several with us: 
We are often asked this, and I would say three things. The first one is that because we 
invest in banks [and] insurance, this is the very stuff that was the heart of [the crisis], 
and the requirements we would have now for liquidity and fu nding a financial 
institution and capital are much more restricted than they would have b een before 
2008. 
Partly that’s driven by regulations, and partly that’s driven by increased prudence by 
us. They’re working together. Banks we would invest in today, we would need much 
more capital and much better liquidity than before 2008. Before 2008, the system had 
worked for a long time, but it stopped working.  
The second two things I will say are routine investing points. We relearned them. One 
is that we were not diversified enough in 2008. Not diversified enough 
geographically. Not diversified enough period, meaning how big the largest position 
was, and not diversified enough by type of industry. We ’re substantially more 
diversified today than we would have been in 2008. 
Lastly, we had lots of companies with trouble, some survived and recovered, a couple 
didn’t. The biggest difference was whether we had control of the company. It was very 
difficult in some situations where we did not. We were a big investor but did not 
control the company and could not force them to act with the dramatic brutality an d 
713
Lessons Learned: J. Christopher Flowers Chute Lynch

--- Page 6 ---
swiftness that was necessary. We would not put ourselves in a similar minority 
position today. 
Dated:  April 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022-14 
714
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1