--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Fabrizio López-Gallo Lessons Learned: Fabrizio López-Gallo 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Fabrizio López-Gallo," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : 
Iss. 1, 722-724. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1642 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/32 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/32

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Fabrizio López-Gallo 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Fabrizio L ópez-Gallo served as the Bank of Mexico’s d irector general of  financial stability 
during the COVID -19 pandemic, having been financial sector specialist and risk analysis and 
special projects manager for the central bank during the 2007–09 Global Financial Crisis (GFC). 
The Mexican government declared a health emergency at the outbreak of the pandemic and 
implemented a general economic shutdown . The Bank of Mexico  intervened by cutting rates 
and initiating extraordinary measures, such as adding bond swaps and loosening rules for 
minimum deposits at commercial banks to provide liquidity. It gave flexibility to commercial 
banks to grant forbearance on mortgage paymen ts and other loans.  López-Gallo was 
responsible for the development and overs ight of strategies, research, and policy 
recommendations on financial stability . He was also the executive secretary of the Financial 
System Stability Council and a member of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.  This 
Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview with López-Gallo held in September 2022; 
the full transcript is available here.  
Question your assumptions. Traditional economic modeling could miss a major shift.  
Economic and statistical models are based on historical data, so they may not reveal new 
evolutionary jumps, such as the collapse of the subprime mortgage market that sparked the 
Global Financial Crisis. Models fell short in forecasting the GFC , said López-Gallo, because 
they were based on assumptions that the economy would behave as it had in the past. But in 
the case of the GFC, he shared, there was no historical precedent for the events that occurred, 
and the data was incomplete: The “correlation of all the relevant housing markets in the US 
[that led to the collapse of the subprime mortgage market] had been almost absent.”  
I think that most of the assumptions were based on independence [separation] 
between the securities and the banks. And one of the things that we didn ’t know at 
the global level, but we did know at the Mexican level, was how interconnected the 
financial system was. And when you have interconnections, you lose this 
independence. But given that there was no clarity whatsoever about how 
interconnected the global financial syst em was and how trouble was brewing for a 
while, then when everything went down with Lehman’s demise, suddenly that was a 
wake-up call for everyone.  
In general, López-Gallo warned, bubbles, like the housing bubble before the GFC , are quite 
hard to predict,  because they generally don’t manifest as bubbles until they are ready to 
collapse. While the models are useful tools, it pays to supplement their assumptions with 
current observations. He explained:  
I always tend to think that econometrics and statistica l modeling are great tools, but 
you have to be mindful of the assumptions that you make when you are adjusting 
these models. And one of the assumptions is that of a pretty well -behaved data 
722

--- Page 4 ---
generating process that will behave in the future as it has behaved in the past. But this 
is not the case. My point is: This does not mean that you have to throw away all your 
models and not trust them. You just have to be mindful that the tail may be heavier 
than you would expect during normal times. I think the statistical models, the 
econometric models work fine most of the time, but when you face a crisis, then they 
don’t work. 
You don’t know what you don’t know. Don’t underestimate cross-border linkages. 
Mexico and the United States have long been tight economic partners. “Decoupling” had been 
a buzzword in financial circles for a while before the GFC and continues today, related López-
Gallo. Mexico is building trade partnerships with many foreign markets besides the United 
States, but its economy remains very closely linked to its northern neighbor.  
Financial authorities in Mexico thought the initial reports of toxic assets in institutions like 
BNP Paribas in France and Bear Stearns in the United States were a contained problem that 
might cause some pain in the specific regions surrounding these institutions but did not 
foreshadow negative spillovers into emerging markets. For López-Gallo, this was predicated 
on Mexico’s experience following the Tequila Crisis in the 1990s. Mexico had made a number 
of changes to increase visibility into the workings of its financial system, especially its banks, 
and, at the start of the GFC, its economy seemed more stabilized.  
But regulators would soon find out what they didn’t know. Despite the increased regulation 
and transparency of banks, there still was limited transparency of the balan ce sheets of 
nonfinancial companies, which turned out to be a blind spot where counterparty risks were 
hiding. When a number of nonfinancial companies began to feel the crush of margin calls on 
the exotic derivatives they were holding, it disrupted the Mexican foreign exchange markets. 
At that point, Mexican regulators knew  that things were not as decoupled as they at first 
believed. López-Gallo provided an example:  
We had a corporation that runs a chain of supermarkets, and it was dealing with 
exotic derivatives, and when the volatility after the Lehman mishap happened, then 
conditions in the financial markets in Mexico started to go really, really bad. Volatility 
increased a lot, causing these nonfinancial entities to have considerable margin calls, 
and, in fact, they went under for a while. 
After the GFC, Mexico has continued to press for decoupling and now has the most free-trade 
agreements of any country in the world, but its connection with the United States remains 
strong. It had almost ful ly recovered from the GFC when the combination of Brexit and a 
change in the political environment in the United States, including talk of renegotiating the 
North American Free Trade Agreement , led to several quarters of stagnant growth starting 
in 2018. It was in this challenging environment that Mexico faced the outbreak of the COVID-
19 pandemic.  
Act early, quickly, and decisively when tackling a crisis. It’s easier to walk things back 
than get them going.  
723
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Mexico declared a  state of  emergency in Februar y 2020  as COVID -19 cases increased . 
Although the government  did not deliver direct stimulus payments to households and 
businesses to spur the economy, the Bank of Mexico did roll out a wide series of liquidity and 
funding facilities to enable the financial system to support any needs coming from the private 
sector and small businesses and households. The emphasis on fiscal discipline played 
favorably for Mexico among international markets, especially compared  with other 
emerging markets, López-Gallo explained:  
As in the US, most of these facilities were not fully used but were appreciated. I think 
giving banks the option of tapping these facilities, if needed, helped a lot. And it was a 
positive signal in terms [of conveying] that the central bank was ready to jump in 
according to their legal mandate. 
Having a tool kit in advance and not being afraid to use it inspires confidence, he explained.  
It’s fundamental. For sure. And for the future, we know that we have this tool kit and 
we will use it if needed. Part of the message to the market is that we will have it to use 
if, and when, it’s needed. Always, there is the worry of moral hazard. Markets should 
not assume that the central bank will be there always to help them in case they run 
into trouble. They have to be responsible. An idiosyncratic shock is not a systemic 
shock, and I’m not sure whether all financial intermediaries are mindful of that.  
It’s best to err on the side of caution and act swiftly and strongly early on, as soon as the crisis 
becomes apparent, but also to maintain some flexibility, said López-Gallo. He elaborated: 
In a crisis episode, mistakes will be made, but you have to go ahead and also be 
flexible. If something that you thought would work is not working, [you have] to steer 
[away from it]. I think one of the important things is that you don ’t have to stick to a 
route if it is not taking you to the place that you think you should be. So, decisiveness, 
quickness, and flexibility, I think , are very important. And also, do not forget about 
previous episodes. 
Dated: April 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2022–20 
724
Lessons Learned: Fabrizio López-Gallo Cardona