--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Cecilia Skingsley Lessons Learned: Cecilia Skingsley 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Haggerty, Maryann (2025) "Lessons Learned: Cecilia Skingsley," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 
725-728. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1643 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/33 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/33

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Cecilia Skingsley 
By Maryann Haggerty 
During the Swedish banking crisis of the early 1990s, Cecilia Skingsley was the press secretary 
for the Ministry of Finance. She held various roles, including chief economist, at Swedbank, one 
of Sweden’s largest banks, from 2007 to 2013, a period that included the Global Financial Crisis 
(GFC) and European Sovereign Debt Crisis. Swedbank suffered heavy losses amid the GFC and 
relied on a government guarantee program for support. In 2013, she became a deputy governor 
of Sveriges Riksbank, Sweden’s central bank; in 2019 , she became first deputy governor. 
Skingsley left the Riksbank in September 2022 to become head of the Bank for International 
Settlements’s Innovation Hub . This Lessons Learned summary is based on a December 2022 
interview with Skingsley; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
A banking crisis is a very complex event , and effective communications require the 
delivery of layered messages to different stakeholders. 
As press secretary for the finance ministry, Skingsley played a pivotal role in communicating 
the government ’s response to its crisis. Sweden took approaches that were novel for the 
nation at the time , including a blanket bank guarantee  by the state , a bad-bank asset 
management arrangement, and a Bank Support Authority. 
Communications then were “obviously very, very difficult,” she said.  
The sentiment in society was that bankers had been rewarding themselves with high 
salaries and bonuses, and although they were losing their jobs, they came out of it 
very favorable, versus taxpayers and the unemployed paying the price for this.  So, it 
was important to craft a policy response that created a sense of claiming 
responsibility, but also handling the problems as fast as possible, so that the banking 
system could do what it’s supposed to do, pricing risks and perform credits. 
To help manage political tensions, the government established a Bank Support Authority , 
operated by civil servants , which created distance between the operations and politicians. 
The government also included the largest opposition party in its response strategies, 
Skingsley said; that muted one source of tension. Communicating with other stakeholders, 
including the general public, required a wide set of tools and communication at different 
complexity levels, depending on their skills  and backgrounds. “We had press conferences, 
briefings, interviews, background tutorials, kind of helping both journalists but also other 
stakeholders to understand what had happened,” she said.  
So over time, I think we didn ’t eliminate critical media, obviously, but I think we 
managed to take away some of the drama around this. Because a banking crisis is 
certainly a very dramatic story, and the media is crawling all over it, as could be 
expected. . . . I think what really worked was that we decided that we wanted to make 
725

--- Page 4 ---
this a success. We  wanted to be open about what had gone wrong, and what the 
politics needed to do in order to sort it out. And we were very open.  
Mid-crisis, she recalled, the government even prepared a white  paper for general 
consumption, so people without economics or banking expertise could better understand 
the situation. Getting parties to agree on the report was not easy, Skingsley recalled: 
And it turned out to be a lot of tension behind the scenes, whe n we tried to explain 
what had gone wrong, and what we wanted to do to fix it. Because different 
stakeholders here wanted to point in other directions. So, we had conflicts behind the 
scenes. We had conflicts with the central bank, with the supervisory aut hority, but 
also with banks themselves. And the lesson I took from that is that, yes, you need to 
try to explain in decent language what had gone wrong, but you have to prepare for a 
lot of conflicts with other stakeholders who don’t want to take the blame, basically. 
Rolling out multiple support measures as a package makes sense  because it provides 
a forceful response , and policymakers cannot be certain which individual measures 
will work. 
At the time of the 2007 –09 Global Financial Crisis, Skingsley was an economist with 
Swedbank, one of the banks that came under the most pressure. “As Lehman defaulted, the 
funding costs for Swedbank skyrocketed, and the management of Swedbank at the time 
could not convince the financial markets that Swedbank was sound enough to enjoy the same 
sort of funding costs as other Swedish banks,” she recalled. 
The government stepped  in with a renewed deposit insurance program and with a state 
guarantee that allowed banks to issue debt and thus roll over funding. In addition, the central 
bank cut interest rates sharply and provided liquidity against c ollateral. According to 
Skingsley, the programs were robust and tailored to address the banks’ needs: 
There was three -months money, there was six -months money, and then they also 
issued one-year money, with a pegged rate. And they also issued, through a swap line 
from the [US] Federal Reserve, access to dollars. I think these measures were very 
crucial, to ease up the funding market for bank debt in Sweden. 
Packaging interventions this way , said Skingsley , proved forceful and was appropriate 
because the policymakers did not know which response would be most effective.  
I think, from a public-sector perspective, most of the things Sweden did then were the 
right ones. They were fast implemented, they were strong measures, and they came 
in packages, rather than one by one. Because, if you issue  support measures one at a 
time, that ’s probably interesting for all the researchers, who want to know what 
works and what doesn ’t work. But policymakers are not that interested in that, 
because they don’t know exactly what works and what doesn ’t work. So, they prefer 
to work with packages, rather than individual measures. And that is exactly what the 
government and the Riksbank did. They came with packages with different kinds of 
content, and they usually had immediate market impact as those things arrived. 
726
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
After a crisis, tools that worked should be institutionalized so that they can be readily 
deployed in the next one.  
In the decades immediately following World War II, Sweden, like many other nations, had a 
highly regulated financial system. Deregulation came quickly in the 1980s. At the time of the 
1990s crisis, the country had few tried -and-true tools at hand to respond.  It tried n ovel 
approaches then, and they worked. But , in Skingsley’s view, the tools were allowed to get 
rusty or were institutionalized imperfectly, which slowed the country’s response to the GFC. 
The interesting thing was that there were not that many safeguards put in place after 
the earlier banking crisis in the 1990s. The most prominent one was the deposit 
insurance scheme that had been put in place, but it was designed in a way that it 
would take months for people to get access to their deposits, and the banking 
institution had to fold. 
As Lehman collapsed, and there were question marks around Swedbank, I wouldn ’t 
say it was an outright run, but there were certainly funding problems, both from a 
wholesale but also retail perspective at Swedbank, meaning that people were 
withdrawing money. They knew that there was deposit insurance, but they had heard 
that it would take months before they would be able to access their money. And that 
was enough for them to withdraw. 
Despite the terms of the deposit insurance scheme , the Swedish government and the 
Riksbank executed a forceful policy response, including a program that  permitted banks to 
issue debt with a state guarantee. 
Sweden is part of the European Union but does not use the euro. So, when the European 
Sovereign Debt Crisis followed the GFC, the effects on the country were indirect. Part of the 
response at the Riksb ank, where Skingsley worked beginning in 2013 , was to cut policy 
interest rates to below zero to fight off deflation. “We need and needed to point out that you 
can’t just talk about inflation targeting. You also have to do things to meet your target ,” she 
said. 
By the end of 2019, rates were back up to zero, just before COVID-19 hit. “It’s absolutely the 
fastest collapse in the economy I have ever seen in my 30 years of working. And the 
uncertainty was monumental,” Skingsley said.  
The Riksbank did not change rates, preferring not to go negative. Rather, said Skingsley, it 
deployed a variety of tools “in those weeks in March  [2020]. And then, in the months that 
followed, we basically just fine -tuned or added to those decisions that had already been 
taken in March 2020. ” The Riksbank expanded its debt purchasing program, to include not 
only government debt, but also municipal bonds, mortgage -backed securities, and even 
corporate issuances. But operational problems caused a six -month delay in the purchase of 
corporate credits , she  said. “And that is a lesson learned, that you need to have internal 
structures ready, to be able to do things quite close in time to the moments you say that you 
are going to do things.“ 
727
Lessons Learned: Cecilia Skingsley Haggerty

--- Page 6 ---
Looking back at the crises she navigated, Skingsley said, 
Very few in s ociety expect downfalls, economic crises, and the risk -taking is always 
based on the idea that the economies will continue to grow. So, if you are a decision -
maker, you have to think about “what if,” and make sure that you a re aware of what 
tools you have, and how they can be applied. And that, I think, is universal for all 
crises. 
Dated: April 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2022–22 
 
728
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1