--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors 
Greg Feldberg 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Carey K. Mott 
Center on Global Energy Policy, Columbia University 
Jill Cetina 
Mays Business School, Texas A&M University 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Feldberg, Greg; Mott, Carey K.; and Cetina, Jill (2025) "How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its 
Supervisors," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 2, 313-355. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1658 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/12 
This Note is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This note is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/
iss2/12

--- Page 3 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors1 
Greg Feldberg,2 Carey K. Mott,3 and Jill Cetina4  
June 25, 2025 
Abstract 
It is well known that Silicon Valley Bank  (SVB) failed in March 2023 because of a toxic 
combination of uninsured deposits and underwater securities. This article argues that the 
bank’s failure could have been avoided if SVB had been subject to two global standards 
established by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. First, the interest-rate risk in 
the banking book ( IRR-BB) standard, never fully implemented in the United States, would 
have identified the bank’s extremely risky asset-liability management strategy and required 
remedial action 10 quarters before it failed. Second, the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR), from 
which US regulators had exempted banks of SVB’s size, would have required the bank to hold 
tens of billions of dollars more liquidity at least four quarters before it failed. The article also 
argues that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation would have saved USD 13.6 billion if 
SVB and other banks that failed in 2023 had been subject to the Basel Committee’s total loss-
absorbing capacity (TLAC) standard , which requires banks to issue bonds that can be 
converted to equity . SVB’s failure resulted in official s ector protection of uninsured 
depositors through the US authorities’ invoking of the systemic risk exception and the 
Federal Reserve’s creation of the Bank Term Funding Program. Given public expectation of 
government and central bank policy intervention in a crisis and elevated levels of US public 
sector debt, bank supervision must emphasize ex  ante crisis prevention.  The conclusion is 
that US bank regulation needs to include quantitative limits on interest-rate risk, liquidity 
risk, and TLAC for more US  banks—not just the systemic US banks. Such rules are 
particularly important given ongoing risks related to still above-target inflation, Treasury 
market fragility,  growing risks to investor confidence in Treasuries, and the Fed’s use of 
unconventional monetary policy, which increases the volatility of both US banking system 
liquidity and uninsured deposits.  
 
Keywords: bank regulation , bank supervision , interest-rate risk, liquidity coverage rati o, 
Silicon Valley Bank, total loss-absorbing capacity  
 
1 This note builds on five blog posts that were originally published on the Yale School of Management’s Systemic 
Risk blog between March and July 2023.  
2 Greg Feldberg, Director of Research, Yale Program on Financial Stability  (YPFS), Yale School of Management. 
3 Carey K. Mott, Research Assistant with the Center on Global Energy Policy , Columbia University, and former 
Senior Research Associate, YPFS.  
4 Jill Cetina, Associate Director of Commercial Banking and Executive Professor of Finance, Mays Business 
School, Texas A&M University. 
313

--- Page 4 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
I. Introduction 
Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) was the first big US bank to fail since the Global Financial Crisis of 
2007–09. The two factors that coincided for SVB and caused the run  on the bank were its 
extraordinary overreliance on deposits that were not insured by the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC), on the one hand, and the significant amount of unrealized 
losses the bank had on long-term securities, on the other. When the bank announced a stock 
sale to raise funds to cover realized losses on some securities, the market quickly turned its 
attention to the much larger unrealized losses on the bank’s books and uninsured depositors 
began to worry that their money was at risk. Within t wo days, the bank experienced an 
extraordinarily swift deposit run and regulators shut it down. 
SVB’s Bad Gamble, in Short 
SVB sowed the seeds of its failure during the COVID-19 crisis, when massive government 
fiscal stimulus and Federal Reserve quantitative easing created a surge in reserves at the Fed 
and uninsured deposits for the entire banking system.  The venture capital industry, SVB’s 
core clientele, boomed, and SVB’s management saw a profitable trade—they took those low-
interest deposits from clients and invested in residential mortgage-backed securities (MBS) 
with maturities of more than 10 years. Deposits rose 65% in 2020 and 85% in 2021; SVB’s 
holdings of residential mortgage-backed securities rose 90% in 2020 and 250% in 2021. Per 
Figure 1, most of SVB’s securities holdings were mortgage -backed securities, classified as 
held-to-maturity (HTM), with maturities of more than 10 years. It also had a smaller portfolio 
of available-for-sale (AFS) securities, mostly Treasuries with maturities of less than 10 years 
(Figure 1). 
Figure 1: SVB’s Gamble on Long-Term Securities (USD billions) 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; YPFS analysis. 
314
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
For a while, the bank’s investment strategy was profitable, and the equity market celebrated 
SVB. One widely read financial blog published an article in May 2021 titled “SVB Financial 
Group is the Best Bank Stock Nobody’s Talking About. ” The author noted the bank’s stock 
had more than doubled over the past year, and went on to say: 
A best-ever quarter in the first period of 2021 underpins the stock’s performance, but 
this story is far from over. The future remains bright for this banker of the ‘innovation 
economy.’ . . . Basically, even though average interest rates are far lower now than they 
were pre-pandemic, Silicon Valley Bank’s assets and loans have grown so much they’re 
still netting more in interest income despite the low rate environment. (Rossolillo 2021) 
SVB’s stock continued to rise in 2021, peaking at more than four times its 2020 low. But the 
party was soon over. In response to significantly above -target inflation, the Fed raised the 
benchmark federal funds rate rapidly in 2022, resulting in mark -to-market losses on SVB’s 
huge portfolio s of negatively convex long-term mortgage -backed securities and US 
Treasuries. By the end of the year, it had USD 15 billion in unrealized losses on those 
securities, almost equal to its entire equity capital (Figure 2). The ventur e capital industry 
also slowed down, leading SVB’s customers to withdraw cash. SVB’s deposits fell 9%, putting 
net interest income under pressure, as the bank replaced lost deposits with more expensive 
wholesale funding. 
Figure 2: SVB’s Accumulating Unrealized Losses (USD billions) 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; YPFS analysis. 
Of course, m ark-to-market losses on held -to-maturity securities do not have to be 
debilitating if a bank has sufficient other liquidity and is able to hold those securities to 
maturity, implying that  its assets and liabilities are well  matched. But in SVB’s case, they 
weren’t. In a few days in March 2023, the bank fell apart rapidly. On March 8, SVB announced 
it had sold USD 21 billion of US Treasuries that ha d been booked as available -for-sale, 
315
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 6 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
virtually its entire AFS portfolio—presumably to meet pressing liquidity needs—and that it 
planned to raise USD 2.25 billion in new capital to cover the realized losses on those sales.  
There would be no buyers for that  equity raise. The stark reality that the bank now had no 
further options to raise liquidity than to sell held-to-maturity securities, which would result 
in the immediate realization of much larger losses, sent the bank in a tailspin. SVB had not 
pledged those securities to use as collateral at the Fed’s discount window or with lenders in 
the repo, or repurchase agreement, market . Still, it  is unlikely that this would have been 
sufficient to cover the bank’s growing depositor demands . SVB d epositors withdrew USD 
42 billion on March 9 and sought another USD 100 billion the next morning, Friday, March 
10. Regulators took over the bank during the day on Friday, an extraordinary move , but 
unavoidable given the circumstances. 
With the full benefit of hindsight, the bank’s failure appears inevitable. Most of the securities 
it owned paid fixed rates and had maturities of more than 10 years. It was simple financial 
math that they would lose value quickly if inflation got out of hand and the Fed raised interest 
rates. Yet, the bank’s management didn’t think that would happen. They expressed the view 
during 2021 and 2022 that they were prepared for further Fed rate cuts, not rate hikes. Their 
portfolio reflected a huge one -way bet on lower rates . SVB  also believed their newfound 
deposits were stable. 
The Thought Experiment: Prudential Rules in Hindsight 
This paper asks whether certain rules, if they had applied to SVB, could have prevented SVB’s 
management from taking that huge one-way bet on interest rates. 
It is clear from Figures 1 and 2 that SVB’s entire securities portfolio was locked in by the 
second half of 2021, a year and a half before its failure, as was its heavy reliance on uninsured 
deposits for funding. Sometime in 2021, the bank could have prevented its eventual demise 
by taking steps to avoid  or mitigate those risk concentrations. For example, it could have 
declined deposits to avoid further rapid balance  sheet growth. It already managed a 
substantial amount of its customers’ cash off its own balance sheet, in money market funds. 
The managed cash was roughly equal to the bank’s on-balance-sheet, uninsured deposits. To 
avoid taking excessive risks with uninsured deposits, management could have simply 
decided to place much more of its customers’ cash off its balance sheet, in money market 
funds, rather than accepting billions of dollars of deposits on its balance sheet. Alternatively, 
it could have held these balances at the Fed or in much shorter-term securities to avoid such 
a large exposure to rising interest rates.  
Either strategy would have resulted in lower profits in the short term. But it  is the role of 
bank management and the board to prudently manage the trade -off between short -term 
profits and long -term viability. It  is also the role of bank supervisors to identify excessive 
risk-taking that could compromise a bank’s safety and soundness. Thus, a key focus of the 
public discussion after SVB and two other large US banks failed in 2023 was whether 
weaknesses in supervision or regulation had been part of the problem.  
316
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
We focus our analysis on a discrete and arguably answerable question: If certain regulations 
had been in place and enforced, would they have made a difference? Could these regulations 
have prevented the dramatic risk management failures at SVB and related failures of 
supervisory oversight if regulators had applied them to the bank two or three years earlier? 
More specifically , could they have prevented  the massive accumulation of uninsured 
deposits and held-to-maturity securities on SVB’s balance sheet? 
Our conclusion, with the obvious benefit of hindsight, is that better prudential regulation 
could have made a difference. We focus  on two global standar ds established by the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) that were not applied to SVB or the other US 
banks that failed in 2023, Signature and First Republic:  
• In Section II, we show that t he interest-rate risk  in the banking book ( IRR-BB) 
standard, never fully implemented in the United States, would have identified SVB’s 
extremely risky asset -liability management (ALM) strategy and required remedial 
action 10 quarters before it failed.  
• In Section III, we show that th e liquidity coverage ratio (LCR), from which US 
regulators had exempted banks of SVB’s size, would have required the bank to hold 
tens of billions of dollars more cash at least four quarters before it failed.  
This article also shows, in Section IV, that SVB would have appeared sound under the other 
Basel liquidity standard, the net stable funding ratio (NSFR). We argue that this result 
reflects potential weaknesses in the NSFR standard. 
Section V argues that the FDIC would have saved USD 13.6 billion if SVB and other banks that 
failed in 2023 had been subject to the Basel Committee’s total loss -absorbing capacity 
(TLAC) standard, which requires banks to issue debt that can be bailed in to support the 
bank’s resolution.  
II. Interest-Rate Risk in the Banking Book  
The transformation of depositors’ savings into investments  is foundational to banking and 
permits higher levels of economic growth. But that transformation also creates challenges 
for asset-liability management owing to the typical maturity mismatch between short-term 
deposits and longer-term loans and securities. Changes in the level of interest rates can affect 
a bank’s profitability and economic value in complex ways. Poor management of that 
interest-rate risk has been at the root o f past financial crises, most notably the US savings 
and loan (S&L) crisis of the early 1980s.  
US Reluctance to Implement the Basel Standard 
In 2004, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision developed a global standard for the 
management of interest-rate risk in the banking book (BCBS 2004) . It strengthened that 
317
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 8 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
standard in 2016 on the expectation that interest rates, then near all -time lows, would 
eventually rise (BCBS 2016a). 
The BCBS IRR-BB standard uses measures of the impact of potential changes in interest rates 
on a bank’s net interest income (NII) and economic value of equity (EVE). EVE is a long-term 
metric that computes the net present value of a bank’s total assets minus the net present 
value of total liabilities, including deposits.  
The current Basel standard includes five key features: 
• A framework for banks’ EVE calculation, including caps on the quantity of deposits 
they can assume to be core and caps on the average assumed maturity by depo sit 
category. 
• A predefined set of six interest-rate-shock scenarios. 
• A test that establishes that a bank is an “outlier” if the worst impact of those shocks 
on its EVE would exceed 15% of Tier 1 capital. 
• An expectation that supervisors will require outlier  banks to hold more capital or 
take other mitigating actions. 
• Public disclosure of banks’ interest-rate sensitivity measures. 
Other jurisdictions, such as Canada, the UK, and the euro area, published rules to implement 
the Basel IRR -BB standard , but US reg ulators never did. Way back in 1991, Congress 
specifically directed US regulators to impose a mandatory capital charge to address interest-
rate risks in US banks, in response to lessons learned from the S&L crisis. In 1992, regulators 
did propose a capital charge for outliers based on a simpler test of economic value. But they 
retreated in 1996 in response to industry pressure and never revisited the proposal.  
Why the reluctance? US regulators said in 1996 that their decision “not to pursue a 
standardized measure and explicit capital charge for interest-rate risk at this time . . . reflects 
concerns about the burden, accuracy, and complexity of a standardized measure and 
recognition that industry techniques for measuring interest-rate risk  are continuing to  
evolve” (Fed 1996).  
The quarterly filings that bank regulators require US banks to publish do not include NII or 
a standard EVE calculation for the six BCBS interest -rate risk scenarios. However, under a 
1997 rule, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) does require all publicly listed US 
banks to disclose their sensitivity to interest -rate shocks in their annual Form 10-K filings 
(US SEC 1997) . However, there is no uniformity in how US banks compute these disclosed 
interest-rate sensitivities. 
Given the US experience with the S&L crisis, which was set off by the Fed’s sharp tightening 
cycle under Chair Paul Volcker, US regulators should have taken interest -rate risk more 
318
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
seriously. The Office of Financial Research, an independent data and research a rm of the US 
Treasury, flagged potential ALM risks facing US banks in its 2014 annual report (OFR 2015). 
This report highlighted: 
[A] reversal of banking system deposits is a potential risk once interest rates rise. U.S. 
banks have seen dramatic growth in their non-interest-bearing deposits relative to total 
banking system liabilities. There is a non -negligible risk that these deposits could shift 
to alternative, higher-yielding investments as rates rise. 
The report also emphasized the potential role of supervisory stress tests in addressing such 
risks:  
Supervisory stress tests currently assume credit losses are the driver that will pressure 
capital. It is also possible that the driver of a bank’s stress is not a macroeconomic shock, 
but a funding stress that arises inside the financial sector or a credit shock that could be 
magnified by funding stress. Potential liquidity and solvency interactions receive little 
consideration. For example, banks have increased securities holdings in held -to-
maturity portfolios by nearly half a trillion dollars since the crisis. Under stress, banks 
may need to use these securities to generate liquidity, either by selling them (which 
could result in a capital loss) or by financing them through repos (which could reduce a 
bank’s leverage ratio and LCR). 
Subsequently, in 2015, one of the authors of this article expanded on these ideas by 
examining how four distinct types of shocks —funding, credit, liquidity, and interest rate 
risk/collateral—could interact to impact banks’ capita l and liquidity ratios. This analysis 
further noted that US supervisory stress tests at the time did not account for mark-to-market 
shocks on banks’ growing securities portfolios, potentially leaving vulnerabilities 
unaddressed (Cetina 2015). 
Yet, for over a decade, as highlighted in a Peterson Institute blog post-SVB, no US supervisory 
stress test has considered rising inter est rates (Honohan 2023) . Instead, US supervisory 
stress tests have focused on banks’ potential trading book and loan losses. Thus, in the US , 
there are no incremental capital requirements for large US banks with high levels of interest-
rate risk. 
Limited Guidance on IRR-BB in Examination Manuals 
The US has implemented some elements of the Basel IRR -BB standard for the largest banks 
through its supervisory processes, rather than through regulation. For example, the 
examination Handbook of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the supervisor 
of banks with national charters, advises examiners to make sure the largest banks test their 
NII and EVE against the Basel Committee’s six prescribed interest -rate scenarios. However, 
neither the OCC nor any other US regulator requires banks to make  these calculations in a 
standardized manner (OCC 2020). 
319
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 10 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Interestingly, the previous edition of the Handbook stated that for banks with more than USD 
250 billion in assets, an EVE reduction in any scenario that exceeded 15% of the bank’s Tier 
1 capital would be considered an outlier , and an examiner should take that into account in 
forming conclusions about the bank’s risk management. However, in 2019, the OCC revised 
the scope of its guidance on interest -rate risk as part of the regulatory tailoring initiative 
mandated by Congress so that it applies only to banks with more than USD 700 billion in 
assets (Fed, FDIC, and OCC 2019). Banks with between USD 250 billion and USD 700 billion 
in assets are still required to run the six Basel scenarios, bu t the OCC Handbook no longer 
applies the 15% outlier test or describes consequences for an examiner’s evaluation of risk 
management for banks of that size. SVB never had more than USD 250 billion in assets. 
The Federal Reserve’s Commercial Bank Examination Manual is even more limited in its 
discussion of interest rate risk and states that Fed examiners may focus only on a bank’s 
compliance with “self-imposed parameters ” (Fed 2023b). Based on the Federal Reserve’s 
manual, it can be difficult for a bank supervisor to challenge a bank’s level of interest -rate 
risk as excessive if the bank is operating within the NII and EVE risk limits that the bank’s 
board approved.  
Limited Focus on IRR-BB in Supervisory Ratings  
The supervisory ratings framework fo r banks in the US includes a rating for the sensitivity 
of a bank’s balance sheet to market risk —including interest -rate risk. It is the “S” in the 
“CAMELS” rating.5 However, the composite US bank supervisory CAMELS ratings are not 
simply an average of th e individual  component ratings but instead reflect examiners’ 
judgment as to how the individual components ratings are combined to provide a summary 
measure of a bank’s overall financial condition. Thus, in theory , a poor S rating —which 
includes a bank’s interest-rate risk—could drive an institution’s composite CAMELS rating 
down and , in turn,  have m eaningful r eal-world r amifications for a supervised entity . For 
example, an institution with a “4” CAMELS composite rating means that close  supervisory 
attention is required and, in most cases, a formal enforcement action may be necessary.  
However, other research suggests that S ratings have had little impact on banks’ CAMELS 
composite ratings. Gopalan and Granja (2023) find that composite CAMELS ratings were not 
significantly affected by exposures to interest -rate risks even after the Federal Reserve 
began raising interest rates in 2022. Similarly, Gaul and Jones (2021) find in their analysis of 
US bank supervisory data from 1984 to 2020 that only about 1% of the variation in a bank’s 
CAMELS composite rating is attributable to the variation in the bank’s S rating. This result 
seems quite low for interest-rate risk, as maturity transformation is a foundational banking 
risk. It also suggests that the absence of the US implementation of thresholds for excessive 
interest rate per the Basel IRR -BB standard risk may limit effective US bank supervision  of 
this risk.  
 
5 US bank examiners use the CAMELS ratings framework to evaluate bank safety and soundness. It includes a 
composite measure, on a five -point scale, and six subcomponents, also on a five -point scale: capital adequacy, 
asset quality, management, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity to market risk.  
320
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
In sum, publicly listed US banks do face SEC requirements to annually disclose their interest-
rate sensitivity but not to publi sh these metrics as part of their quarterly regulatory filings 
for bank regulators. Moreover, these metrics and their calculation are not standardized per 
the BCBS methodology , there are no supervisory thresholds with consequences , and US 
banks with high l evels of interest -rate risk are rarely subject to having their composite 
supervisory rating downgraded.  
Thought Experiment: IRR-BB as a Warning Signal for SVB 
Data from SVB’s 10-K filings suggest that the Basel Committee’s outlier test for interest-rate 
risk would have flagged Silicon Valley Bank in four out of the five years between 2017 and 
2021 if US regulators had held the bank to that standard  (Figure 3). The bank’s EVE losses 
would have been unacc eptably high under a falling -rate scenario in 2017 and 2018  and 
unacceptably high under a rising-rate scenario in 2020, 2021, and the first three quarters of 
2022. SVB stopped publicly reporting this information in the fourth quarter of 2022.  
Figure 3: SVB’s Economic Value of Equity (EVE) Sensitivity, 2017–21 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; YPFS analysis. 
In September 2020, the IRR-BB EVE metric immediately pointed to trouble under rising-rate 
scenarios when SVB started piling new deposits into long -term securities. Figures 4 and 5 
show the impact of 200–basis point (bp) and 100-bp parallel shocks on SVB’s EVE over time, 
including a falling -rate scenario (green lines) and a rising -rate scenario (blue lines) , based 
on SVB’s 10-K and 10-Q filings. Figure 4 shows that the modeled declines in EVE would have 
exceeded the Basel threshold, represented by the dotted red line, starting in the third quarter 
of 2020. Figure 5 shows that the EVE declines also would have exceeded the bank’s internal 
SVB Financial Model Results
$ billions
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Base Economic Value of Equity 7.3         8.8         8.1         11.2        20.7        
EVE at stressed +200 bps 8.1         9.3         7.5         9.5          15.0        
EVE decline at stressed +200 bps N/A N/A (0.6)       (1.7)        (5.7)        
EVE decline in percent 11% 6% -8% -15% -28%
EVE at stressed -200 bps 5.7         7.6         8.6         11.5        21.3        
EVE decline at stressed -200 bps (1.6)       (1.3)       N/A N/A N/A
EVE decline in percent -22% -14% 5% 3% 3%
SVB Balance Sheet
Total Capital 4.6         5.6         6.6         8.2          16.7        
Tier 1 Capital 4.2         5.2         6.3         7.7          16.2        
Basel 2016 threshold: 15% of Tier 1 Capital 0.6         0.8         0.9         1.2          2.4          
Basel pre-2016 threshold: 20% of Total Capital 0.9         1.1         1.3         1.6          3.3          
Max EVE decline under stress (1.6)       (1.3)       (0.6)       (1.7)         (5.7)         
Max EVE decline: Percent of Tier 1 Capital -37% -24% -10% -22% -35%
Max EVE decline: Percent of Total Captial -34% -23% -9% -21% -34%
EVE decline exceeds Basel 2016 threshold? YES YES NO YES YES
EVE decline exceeds pre-Basel 2016 threshold? YES YES NO YES YES
Capital shortfall: Basel 2016 standard (0.9)       (0.5)        0.3          (0.6)          (3.3)          
Source: SVB 10-Ks
321
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 12 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
“outer” limit, which its board set at 10% of EVE in a 100 -bp parallel shock, in the third 
quarter of 2020 . SVB would have come back into compliance with the internal limit in the 
fourth quarter but gone out of compliance again throughout 2021 and 2022. Of course, in 
2022, the Fed raised interest rates not 100 bps or 200 bps, but 400 bps.  
Meanwhile, there is no doubt SVB was an outlier when compared to other US banks. The 
median OCC-supervised bank with more than USD 10 billion in assets would have seen a 5% 
increase in its EVE in the face of a 200-bp shock in the 21-month period through June 2021, 
according to the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency’s semiannual  Interest Rate Risk 
Statistics Reports, which are based on statistics gathered from hundreds of ban ks recently 
examined by the OCC (OCC 2024). The 25th-percentile bank loss was just 1%, and the highest 
estimated loss for any bank in the survey was 17%. SVB’s estimated EVE losses in both the 
100-bp and 200-bp rising-rate scenarios were consistently worse than the worst large bank 
in the OCC’s survey  from September 2020 until the bank stopped publicly reporting this 
information, with the exception of the blip in December 2020 (Figure 6). 
Figure 4: Impact of 200-bp Parallel Shocks on SVB’s EVE vs. Basel Threshold (% EVE) 
 
Note: SEC reporting shows changes in estimated EVE; Basel shows Tier 1 equity.  
Sources: Company Forms 10-K and 10-Q.  
  
322
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 5: Impact of 100-bp Parallel Shocks on SVB’s EVE vs. Internal Limits (% EVE)  
Sources: Company Forms 10-K and 10-Q. 
Figure 6: SVB’s EVE Sensitivity vs. the Worst Bank with More than USD 10 billion in 
Assets in the OCC’s Biannual Survey (% EVE) 
 
Sources: Company Forms 10-K and 10-Q; OCC statistical reports; authors’ analysis.  
IRR-BB Conclusions 
The Federal Reserve’s May 2023 report on SVB’s failure  targeted its supervisors for not 
demanding that the bank address its interest-rate risk deficiencies: 
SVBFG management was focused on the short -run impact on profits  . . . With regard to 
interest-rate risk-management, supervisors identified interest-rate risk deficiencies in 
the 2020, 2021, and 2022 CAMELS exams but did not issue supervisory findings (MRA/ 
MRIA). The deficiencies were only communicated as written advisories or verbal 
observations. (Fed 2023a)  
323
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 14 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
On the other hand, examiners are typically at a disadvantage when challenging management 
of a profitable bank about risks that may or may not  manifest. A  specific, quantitative 
regulatory standard with an outlier test, like the Basel IRR-BB standard, would have been a 
useful tool for SVB’s supervisors in 2017 –18 and again in 2020 –22. The Basel outlier 
standard, backed up by comprehensive regulatory dat a on interest rate risk , would have 
provided solid evidence that SVB was not operating in a safe and sound manner. Strong rules 
can both empower competent supervis ors and act as  a floor on bank management and 
supervisory incompetence. 
III. Liquidity Coverage Ratio  
The liquidity coverage ratio is a Basel standard introduced after the Global Financial Crisis . 
It requires banks to hold sufficient high -quality liquid assets (HQLA s) to manage expected 
net cash outflows in a 30-day stress scenario.  
In the original version of the rule implementing the Basel LCR standard that US regulators 
finalized in 2014, banks with USD 250 billion in assets or USD 10 billion in foreign exposures 
had to maintain their LCR ratios above 100%. SVB would have been subject to that ratio 
because its foreign exposures met the threshold. 
However, in 2019, the US bank regulators, following an act of Congress, determined that 
most banks with between USD 50 billion and USD 250 billion in assets would no longer be 
subject to the LCR or other enhanced prudential standards applied to the most systemically 
important banks (Fed, FDIC, and OCC 2019; Fed 2019). As a result of this regulatory tailoring 
in the US, banks of SVB’s size and smaller and banks without a bank holding company (BHC) 
were no longer subject to the LCR. 
Thought Experiment: LCR as a Warning Signal for SVB 
SVB’s first quarter 2023 public financials suggest that its LCR would have been 75% at the 
end of 2022, substantially below the 100% threshold, if regulators had required the bank to 
report it. See our calculations in Appendix A. The Federal Reserve’s material loss review of 
the SVB failure also noted that SVB’s supervisors did not believe that SVB’s liquidity buffer 
was adequate. One clear conclusion from our analysis is that it is a challenge to calculate the 
LCR working with the available public data for a company that is not required to disclose 
LCR data. Given SVB’s undercapitalization, a more solid liquidity buffer could have reassured 
uninsured depositors.  
But the bank would have long been out of compliance with the LCR standard. On April 28, 
2023, the Federal Reserve issued Vice Chair Michael Barr’s report on the failure of SVB (Fed 
2023a). The report, on page 88, included the Fed’s calculation of SVB’s LCR on a monthly 
basis from March 2022 to February 2023 , based on confidential data available only to the 
Fed. Over those 12 months, the report said, the bank’s LCR never exceeded 100%, ranging 
from a high of 99% in March 2022 to a low of 73% in September 2022.  
324
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 7 represents an admittedly rough effort to fit our methodology to the quarter -end 
data in the Barr report. Figure s 8 takes those figures and estimate s how much additional 
HQLA the company would have needed to meet a 100% LCR requirement . Figure 9 shows 
the HQLA gaps assuming  a 125% LCR, including the typical management buffer that US 
global systemically important bank s (G-SIBs) that are subject to the rule tend to maintain . 
(See BCBS [2025] for a dashboard of updated LCR averages on a regional basis .) The 
conclusion: If subject to the LCR, SVB would have needed to take actions to increase its HQLA 
by USD 20 billion more than a year before it failed and would have been flagged as having a 
USD 40 billion HQLA deficiency six months before it failed.  
Figure 7: SVB’s LCR over Time 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; Fed 2023a, 88; YPFS analysis.  
  
325
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 16 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 8: SVB’s HQLA Shortfalls vs. 100% LCR 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; Fed 2023a, 88; YPFS analysis. 
Figure 9: SVB’s HQLA Shortfalls vs. 125% LCR 
 
Sources:  Company financial reports; Fed 2023a, 88; YPFS analysis. 
  
326
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Of course, if the bank were subject to the rule, its supervisors would not have allowed its LCR 
to fall so far or allow its HQLA buffer to become so concentrated in negatively convex agency 
MBS due to the LCR’s limits on these securities. Bank management and supervisors shouldn’t 
just react when a bank breaches a limit —they should act when limit breaches become 
foreseeable. The LCR rule also brings additional supervisory oversight. As the Barr report 
noted: 
The LCR rule also requires a firm to have the operational capability to monetize its liquid 
assets and to test this capability periodically. In addition, the LCR rule places limits on 
the composition of assets that qualify as high -quality liquid assets. If  SVBFG had been 
subject to the LCR, it may have adopted more proactive monitoring or managing of its 
liquidity position and mix of liquid assets. (Fed 2023a, 88) 
On the other hand , if subject to the rule, SVB may have chosen to improve its LCR through 
other means, in addition to holding more HQLAs. It may have followed a more responsible 
funding strategy, with more long-term debt (LTD) and less uninsured deposits, as the bank 
itself said in its 2022 10-K, published less than a month before it failed:  
It is possible that, as a result of further growth, we may  . . . become subject to LCR and 
NSFR requirements or other heightened liquidity requirements in the future, which 
would require us to maintain high -quality liquid assets in accordance with specific 
quantitative requirements and increase the use of long -term debt as a funding source . 
(SVB 2023a, 87) 
The bulk of SVB’s unrealized securities losses were in its HTM portfolio. US GAAP does not 
permit any interest-rate derivatives to qualify for hedge accounting for HTM securities. Thus, 
because the mark -to-market gains and losses for any interest -rate derivatives would pass 
directly through a bank’s income statement, US banks do not hedge HTM securities. This can 
result in bank management poorly managing the in terest-rate risk associated with HTM 
securities. However, the US LCR rule requires using market valuations for HTM securities for 
purposes of measuring a bank’s HQLA. Thus, application of the LCR to SVB could have helped 
reduce the outsized interest-rate risk in its HTM portfolio. Specifically, SVB’s unrealized HTM 
losses would have required it to take remedial action to strengthen its liquidity buffer or 
disincentivized such behavior. 
Moreover, if the bank had been subject to the LCR, it would have been required to publicize 
more data about its liquidity risks. The market, not just bank supervisors, may have been 
more focused on the risks it faced. Uncertainty about both solvency and liquidity and the 
ability to recover one’s deposit in full is an essential element of a bank run.  
To be clear, no LCR-covered bank could have survived the run SVB faced in March 2023, but 
SVB was not covered by the LCR . The role of the LCR is not to allow a bank to manage any 
potential crisis but to promote sound liquidity risk  management to help prevent it from 
facing a crisis.  
327
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 18 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
LCR Conclusions 
SVB’s failure carries an important lesson about the liquidity of underwater long-term assets 
and discount window readiness. In contrast to SVB, large banks in the US that were subject 
to the LCR managed the spring 2023 crisis in part because they were subj ect to heightened 
oversight and had built substantial liquidity buffers. While some LCR-covered US banks had 
substantial unrealized securities losses due to rising interest rates, the LCR standard did 
force these banks to increase their HQLA s before 2023 . Cipriani, Eisenbach, and Kovner  
(2024) analyzes bank runs using Fedwire data and finds that no US banks with assets more 
than USD 250 billion experienced runs . The authors conclude that the absence of runs for 
these banks in the spring of 2023 is evidence of a too -big-to-fail effect . However, their 
analysis focuses solely on bank balance sheet characteristics and does not test for regulatory 
differences as a possible explanatory variable. Given SVB’s and First Republic’s assets—more 
than USD 200 billion but  less than  USD 250 billion —the paper’s finding s leave open the 
possibility that the 2019 narrowed scope of application of the US LCR rule due to regulatory 
tailoring may have also played a role. 
There is broad agreement in the US that most banks are small and should not need to follow 
enhanced prudential standards designed for large, complex, and internationally active 
banks. But, with more than USD 200 billion in assets, SVB was not small. Meanwhile, the US 
remains unusual among developed nations in applying the LCR only to the very largest 
banks. Most jurisdictions —the UK, Europe, most of Asia —have maintained full LCR 
disclosure and threshold requirements for most or all banks. Yet, there has been little public 
discussion in the US since the 2023 banking failures about the possibility of extending LCR 
regulation to midsized US banks and the role of the 2018 regulatory tailoring in the 2023 US 
bank failures.  
So, the key takeaway from the SVB failure is that banks like SVB should be subject to the LCR, 
not that the LCR itself failed or needs to be fundamentally reconsidered. 
Still, some tweaks to the LCR’s design may deserve consideration. Concentrated uninsured 
deposits could merit a higher runoff rate. It may also be appropriate to limit the duration of 
securities held in banks’ HQLA s. The lesson specific to SVB is that HTM securities are not 
perfectly liquid and agency MBS are negatively convex and subject to significant extension 
risk. As deposits also contain an embedded option that allows the depos itor to withdraw 
funds at any time, agency MBS funded by uninsured deposits is akin to a bank being doubly 
short interest-rate volatility. Liquidity is the ability to ensure the availability of funds to meet 
commitments at a reasonable price at all times without damaging capital. Finally, unrealized 
gains and losses on available-for-sale securities are incorporated in capital  only for banks 
with more than USD 700 billion in assets, not for banks of SVB’s size. 
IV. Net Stable Funding Ratio  
The net stable funding ratio is the other international standard introduced in the wake of the 
Global Financial Crisis to address banks’ funding and liquidity risks . It measures banks’ 
328
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
maturity transformation risk over one year —that is, the extent to which banks fund lon g-
term assets with short -term liabilities. Maturity transformation is the core business of 
banking, of course, and it creates the most basic risks that banks must manage.  
The NSFR requires  banks’ available stable funding (ASF) to exceed their required sta ble 
funding (RSF) over a 12-month time frame. The NSFR complements the LCR. While the LCR 
focuses on short-term liquidity risk , the NSFR focuses on a bank’s structural asset -liability 
management. 
In contrast to the LCR , SVB would have complied with the NSF R. We estimate the bank’s 
NSFR would have been 132%, as explained in Appendix B (Figure 12). That would have put 
it comfortably above the regulatory 100% target and above the  global average  of about 
120% (which excluded US banks until 2023; see BCBS [2025]). Based on that estimate, SVB’s 
NSFR would not have raised any alarms about the bank’s extraordinary exposures to 
uninsured deposits on the liability side of its balance sheet and long-dated agency mortgage-
backed securities on the asset side. 
However, that result does not mean that SVB managed its funding risks appropriately. 
Rather, the result reflects potential weaknesses in the  2020 NSFR final rule itself and in the 
2014 Basel standard on which US regulators based the rule (BCBS 2014; Fed, FDIC, and OCC 
2020). First, how stable should the rules consider uninsured wholesale deposits to be, given 
the runs in this episode and earlier episodes? Second, are the haircuts on HTM securities 
sufficient? Specifically, under the NSFR , if a n HTM security quali fies as a HQLA, it will 
generally receive a lower required stable funding factor , meaning less stable funding is 
required to support its assumed high liquidity . Third, does it make sense to continue to 
exclude unrealized gains and losses on AFS securities from regional banks’ capital measure, 
even as reported capital is assigned a 100% available-stable-funding factor under the NSFR? 
Note that no US banks were subject to the NSFR at the time of SVB’s failure. T he US NSFR 
rule required only the very largest US banks to begin publicly reporting their NSFRs in the 
second quarter of 2023. Even if the NSFR had been in place in 2023 , SVB would have been 
exempted under the same tailoring rule that exempted banks of SVB’s size and those without 
bank holding companies from the LCR (Fed, FDIC, and OCC 2019).  
NSFR Conclusions 
It is surprising that a bank like SVB taking extraordinary maturity transformation risks could 
have passed a regulatory metric designed specifically to identify such outliers.  A few 
reasonable tweaks to the NSFR could have created more cautionary outcomes.  
Most important is the treatment of uninsured wholesale deposits. The rapid growth of SVB’s 
uninsured deposits was one of the biggest red flags the company’s finances should have 
raised. Perhaps the rule could be revised to penalize newer uninsured wholesale deposits—
give them a lower or even  0% ASF factor for the first year, for example. That would  have 
helped flag rising risks in all fast-growing banks, not just in SVB. 
329
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 20 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
On the other hand, there were clearly idiosyncratic aspects of SVB’s deposit base. The rule 
allows firms and their supervisors to adjust assumptions about funding factors in such cases, 
although it isn’t clear how often supervisors do this. SVB’s uninsured deposits were almost 
entirely from VC-funded companies. Many of these companies run negative cash flows every 
month and sustain their businesses through periodic injections of new capital. For that 
reason, considering those deposits to be 50% “available” over a 12-month horizon may seem 
extremely optimistic —and note that the rule considers such nonfinancial companies’ 
deposits to be 50% available whether or not they are operational. Assuming 25% instead 
would have lowered SVB’s NSFR in our model below 100%, all other assumptions remaining 
the same; assuming 0% would have lowered its NSFR to 66%. 
The other issue that SVB’s failure raises is the treatment of underwater HTM securities that 
qualify as HQLA s. The rule requires minimal ava ilable stable funding for such securities 
because it assumes an active repurchase agreement funding market. In other words, it 
assumes the repo market will fund 100% of Level 1 HQLAs and 85% of Level 2A HQLAs; it 
requires stable funding for the remainder—0% for Level 1 and 15% for Level 2A. 
But if these securities have unrealized losses, the repo market (or other funding sources) 
won’t fund their full carrying value. One tweak to the rule would require 100% stable funding 
for the difference between fair market value and carrying value for these securities. So, even 
Treasuries and high-quality agency mortgage-backed securities would require some stable 
funding in current market conditions, which would lead to unrealized losses. The rule could 
continue to requ ire some stable funding based on collateral quality for the remaining fair 
value, to reflect the risk that funding may become expensive for such securities through 
higher haircuts.  
Boosting the required stable funding in our model for Treasuries (Level 1)  from 0% to, say, 
15%—including both a 100% charge on a 10% loss and a small new 5% charge for the 
remaining fair value—and boosting the required stable funding for agency mortgage-backed 
securities (Level 2A) from 15% to 50%—including a 100% charge on a 20% loss and a higher 
30% charge for the remaining fair value—would have lowered SVB’s NSFR to 100%. 
V. Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity6 
The FDIC could have saved USD 13.6 billion in the resolution of SVB and two other large 
banks that failed in 2023 if regulators had earlier held the banks to the total loss -absorbing 
capacity standard, based on reasonable assumptions (see Appendix C). 
In 2023 , US regulators resolved three large, failed banks: SVB, Signature Bank, and First 
Republic Bank. The FDIC estimated then that coverage of uninsured depositors, discounts on 
 
6 A version of this note was originally published on the Yale School of Management’s Systemic Risk blog on July 
6, 2023. The authors wish to thank Jordan Thursby, Paolo Colonna, and Stephanie Quiet for their hel pful input 
and comments on the original version of this note. The views and analysis are those of the authors and remain 
personal to them. 
330
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
the purchase price of the banks, and potential losses on the assets it assumed would cost its 
Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) a total of USD 31.5 billion, roughly half of which it recoup ed 
later from other large banks (Mitchell 2023). 
Under the 2016 TLAC standard agreed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 
regulators began requiring the world’s largest banks to maintain a minimum level of long -
term, unsecured debt to complement their regulatory capital. Together, this debt and 
regulatory capital (equity) represent a bank’s TLAC. If a bank’s losses exceed its capital, the 
additional layer of debt can be “bailed in,” that is, converted to equity, providing an additional 
cushion against the bank’s insolvency.  
The conversion of TLAC facilitates the open -bank resolution of bank holding companies. 
Regulators now expect the largest bank holding companies to have resolution plans under 
which they can enter bankruptcy without shutting th eir banking and investment banking 
subsidiaries. TLAC complements these plans because it recapitalizes these subsidiaries and 
keeps them open.  
Currently, US regulators require all banks to meet minimum capital requirements. But they 
require only eight US global systemically important banks to meet the TLAC requirement, 
which includes the layer of long -term debt on top of capital. In late 2022, US regulators 
proposed extending the rule to  the five or so additional domestic banks with greater than 
USD 250 billion in assets (Fed and FDIC 2022).  
Following the 2023 bank failures —all three of which were below th is USD 250 billion 
threshold—the banking regulators, in August 2023, issued a rule to subject banks with USD 
100 billion or more in assets to long -term debt requirements comparable to those that G -
SIBs face under TLAC; the proposed TLAC rule has yet to be finalized (Fed, FDIC, and OCC 
2023).  
The bank resolutions in 2023 offer an opportunity to study how a rule with a broader scope 
of application might have worked if it already had been in place.  
Background on TLAC 
Under the Basel TLAC standard, G-SIBs are required to hold an additional cushion on top of 
their minimum regulatory capital requirements  (BCBS 2016b) . In addition to common 
equity, TLAC includes unsecured debt with a remaining maturity of more than one yea r, so 
long as that debt is subordinated to deposits and other excluded liabilities. As of 2022, a G -
SIB’s total TLAC under the Basel standard should be the greater of (1) 18% of its risk -
weighted assets (RWAs)—that is, the bank’s loans, securities, and oth er assets, weighted to 
reflect the risk of loss to the bank—or (2) 6.75% of its leverage exposures—that is, the bank’s 
total assets and off-balance-sheet exposures.  
Beyond these minimum standards, implementation varies by country. The US applies a 
minimum 18% of RWA and 7.5% of leverage exposures —again, though, only to G-SIBs. The 
Basel standard also sets an expectation that LTD will form at least one -third of the TLAC 
331
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 22 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
requirement (see the standard, BCBS [2015, 3]). Following Basel, the US requires its G -SIBs 
to have 6% of RWA in LTD, or one-third of the 18% requirement.  
Unlike the US, the EU requires banks of all asset sizes to meet a minimum requirement for 
their own funds and eligible liabilities, or “MREL,” and regulators vary this requirement by 
the size of the bank. With some minor exceptions, liabilities qualifying for MREL are the same 
as for TLAC: long -term, unsecured debt with at least a year of residual maturity  (Benoit 
2016). The primary difference is where those liabilities fall in the creditor  hierarchy. For 
example, unlike TLAC, MREL includes some liabilities, such as senior preferred bonds, that 
rank pari passu with protected liabilities, such as common claims.7  
As of 2022, European G-SIBs have to hold a minimum level of MREL at the Basel s tandard: 
18% of RWAs or 6.75% of leverage exposures. So-called “top-tier banks”—non-G-SIB banks 
with assets exceeding EUR 100 billion and other designated banks —have to hold 13.5% of 
RWAs or 5% of leverage exposures in MREL, roughly 75% the level required of G-SIBs8 (Bank 
of Portugal 2020) . EU regulators also have flexibility and discretion to apply an MREL 
standard based on a bank’s size and financial condition, meaning most G -SIBs and top -tier 
banks have institution-specific requirements. 
Thought Experiment: TLAC as Savings for the FDIC 
How much more of the losses could the failed banks’ non -depositor creditors have borne, 
and how much could the FDIC thus have saved, if US regulators had held them to a TLAC 
requirement? 
Of course, it’s impossible to  know what requirement regulators would have imposed on 
these banks if they had imposed one. We could simply have assumed that regulators would 
have applied the same rule that they applied to G -SIBs: TLAC equal to at least 18% of risk -
weighted assets or 7. 5% of leverage exposures. But we thought it’s more likely regulators 
would have taken a tailored approach, as they did in other areas, and applied a European-
like standard.9  
 
7 The EU, unlike the US, does not apply a minimum debt ratio to its TLAC (see Benahmed [2022, 7]). However, 
it does set an additional subordination requirement, called a bank’s total liabilities and own funds (TLOF), 
which is set at 8% of RWAs. 
8 European authorities also designate some banks with less than EUR 100 billion in assets as other systemically 
important institutions , which are subject to the lower MREL standard  (EBA 2023). Furthermore, European 
banks face additional MREL requirements due to capital  buffers and supervisory add -ons; in practice, the 
average MREL requirement for large European non -G-SIBs was about 20% of RWA at the end of 2022, 
according to the Single Resolution Board  (SRB 2023, 5) . Practically all European banks will meet the EU’s 
capital conservation buffer , at 2.5%, if not an entire combined buffer requirement  (CBR), which includes the 
capital conservation buffer, a countercyclical buffer, a systemic risk buffer, and a systemically important bank 
buffer (EBA 2017; ECB 2024). 
9  Our ca lculations do not apply a TLOF -like standard, not only because these three banks had different 
corporate structures but for the more essential point that US law statutorily subordinates a bank’s other 
liabilities to its depositors  (US Congress 2021) . US re gulators impose subordination requirements on 
 
332
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Ultimately, the precise level of required TLAC should reflect its purpose, and non -G-SIBs 
would probably hold TLAC for a different purpose than would G-SIBs. The G-SIBs typically 
have multiple banking and investment banking subsidiaries that would need to be 
recapitalized—by converting TLAC into equity —in order to stay open through the holding 
company’s bankruptcy.  
In contrast, a non-G-SIBs’ TLAC might be used to facilitate the FDIC’s most common form of 
resolution, known as a purchase -and-assumption transaction. In purchase-and-assumption 
transactions, the FDIC arranges for a bigger bank to purchase the bank and assume most of 
its liabilities, leaving the remaining assets and liabilities with the FDIC. This is the approach 
it took in these bank failures, e xcept that it first had to create two bridge banks before it 
could line up buyers for SVB and Signature.  
Crucially, the FDIC did impose losses on existing shareholders and creditors of the three 
banks. That meant total losses for the three banks’ shareholders (about USD 43 billion, based 
on separate calculations of the book value and market value at year -end), preferred equity 
holders (USD 7.3 billion), and other creditors ( USD 4.7 billion). The refore, the total bail-in 
for shareholders and creditors was about USD 55 billion (see Figure 10).  
  
 
intermediate holding companies only, that is, the US holding companies of the US operations of foreign banks, 
which are not bound by US statutory subordination (Fed 2017). 
333
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 24 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 10: Costs of Resolution to DIF and Bail-in Investors 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; FDIC press releases; YPFS analysis. 
In the immediate aftermath of these failures, at the time the authors performed their 
analysis, the FDIC’s bank-funded DIF was also depleted by an estimated USD 31.5 billion.10 
Roughly half, or USD 15.8 billion, resulted from the FDIC’s coverage of uninsured depositors 
in SVB and Signature under the systemic risk exception (SRE). The FDIC is obliged to recoup 
the costs of protecting uninsured depositors under this exceptional treatment through 
special assessments, which it is in the process of levying on 113 banks  (Gruenberg 2023; 
Mitchell 2023). The remaining half, or USD 15.7 billion, was a loss borne b y the DIF due to 
the discounts offered to the purchasers of the failed banks (not including any loss -sharing 
agreements with the buyers of the failed banks) and the estimated losses on the assets the 
FDIC assumed and will eventually liquidate. With a TLAC requirement, there would have 
been more creditors available to absorb losses, providing a first line of defense for the DIF.11  
 
10 Since the failures, the FDIC has con tinued to update its loss estimates and the amount attributable to the 
protection of uninsured depositors; see, for example, FDIC (n.d.). 
11 Although the DIF was designed to absorb losses in the event of bank failures, its limited capacity would prove 
insufficient in the event of widespread contagion, which might be aggravated by doubts about its capacity to 
insure losses. Therefore, regulators should be interested in minimizing the impact that any single bank failure 
has on the fund’s resources. 
Costs of Resolution Silicon Valley 
Bank
Signature 
Bank
First Republic 
Bank
As of Dec. 31, 2022 ($ millions)
Date Closed Mar. 12, 2023 Mar. 12, 2023 May 1, 2023
Date Purchased Mar. 27, 2023 Mar. 19, 2023 May 1, 2023
Buyer First Citizens NY Comm BC JPMC
Cost to DIF
Assets Purchased 72,000              38,400              186,000            
Cost (assets + assumed liabilities) 55,500              35,900              182,600            
Discount at Purchase Price (16,500)             (2,500)               (3,400)               
FDIC's Estimated Loss to DIF (≥discount) (20,000)             (2,500)               (13,000)             
Total Estimated Cost to DIF (35,500)             
Costs of Bail-in for Investors    
Common Equity: Market Value (13,602)             (7,251)               (22,297)             
Common Equity: Book Value (inc. CCB) (16,180)             (12,006)             (14,475)             
Preferred Equity: Book Value (3,646)               -                    (3,633)               
Debt: Book Value (3,379)               (571)                  (779)                  
Total Bail-in: Market Value (20,627)             (7,822)               (26,709)             
Total (55,158)             
Total Bail-in: Book Value (23,205)             (12,577)             (18,887)             
Total (54,669)             
Note: minority interests are excluded from CET1 & AT1. 
Sources: Dec. 31, 2022 Call Reports, 10-Ks, FDIC press releases, Refinitiv. 
334
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
This distinction between using TLAC to keep banks open and using it solely to protect the 
insurance fund is apparent in the Euro pean Banking Authority’s most recent report on the 
MREL capacity of European banks. The largest European banks plan for an open -bank 
resolution, in which TLAC converts to equity and the bank stays open; most smaller banks 
plan for a transfer to an acquiring bank, similar to a purchase-and-assumption agreement, in 
which TLAC is available to absorb losses (EBA 2020, 9). 
TLAC Conclusions 
We conclude that, had the three banks raised sufficient LTD and equity to meet a version of 
the TLAC standard  akin to that implemented in Europe , those investors would have borne 
more of the losses—potentially saving about USD 13.6 billion (Figure 13, Appendix C). 
Meanwhile, our understanding of the actual write -downs performed during the FDIC -
brokered purchase -and-assumption transactions suggests that the fundamental logic of 
TLAC is sound. The FDIC forced losses on the bondholders and shareholders of these three 
banks, where it may once have protected them in a systemic risk exception event. Perhaps 
more interesting is that the FDIC performed these bail -ins both under an SRE designation 
(SVB and Signature) and not (First Republic).  
In 2019, when Martin Gruenberg was an FDIC board member but no t the chair, he said that 
in a resolution without a buyer, and little or no unsecured debt, the least -cost resolution 
would require uninsured depositors to take losses. It’s reasonable, then, to view the FDIC’s 
ex ante least -cost option for resolution as r equiring a bank’s investors to bear more of the 
losses, protecting uninsured depositors. Our analysis shows that, unsurprisingly, these 
banks had not issued enough LTD to bail -in, and the extent of their TLAC shortfalls provide 
insight into how regulators may consider applying TLAC requirements to smaller US banks. 
In analyzing their LTD shortfall, we make four observations.  
First, in most US banking groups, the top -tier parent company issues all of the long -term, 
unsecured debt, and all deposits and other  short-term, unsecured debt are issued by the 
operating subsidiary. Therefore, TLAC-eligible senior debt must be issued by a bank holding 
company, which structurally subordinates it to the debt issued by the holding company’s 
subsidiaries. This “clean hold ing company requirement ” allows a resolution authority to 
bail-in the holding company’s debt so that the operating subsidiaries may continue as going 
concerns. First Republic and Signature, however, did not operate a BHC structure like SVB, 
technically rendering all of their outstanding debt instruments ineligible for TLAC.  If 
regulators apply LTD requirements to more banks, they must consider whether the banks 
will be required to establish a BHC structure that issues LTD. This is a question of how easy 
it is to resolve the entity, since by law , bail-in-able debt is statutorily subordinated to 
protected liabilities. Recall that after the 2018 tailoring rule , the lack of a BHC also implied 
that First Republic and Signature could never be subject to the LCR no matter how large they 
grew.  
335
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 26 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Second, due to these organizational differences, any TLAC re quirement should complement 
resolution strategies. As we’ve noted, G-SIBs need TLAC to replenish their capital, such that 
the operating subsidiaries may stay open while the holding company goes through 
bankruptcy. Smaller banks need enough TLAC to execute their resolution strategies under 
Title 1 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 , which 
typically includes the sale of the business to a larger buyer. In response to proposals to apply 
TLAC to more banks, First Republic stated that its non-BHC structure meant that it did “not 
present the risks and complexities with respect to financial stability or resolvability” (Roffler 
2023, 4). To be sure, it was sold faster than the other two banks. But it also had less than USD 
1 billion in LTD to bail in and cost the FDIC’s DIF an estimated USD 13 billion.  
Third, a bail-in is supposed to prevent losses to insured depositors, and in this respect, there 
is no fundamental difference between holding the loss-absorbing capacity in debt or equity.12 
However, regulators will need to consider the proper debt-equity ratio in any tailored TLAC 
requirement. The five largest US banks not currently subject to the TLAC requirement 
recommended that regulators allow them to raise either debt or equity (Non-GSIB Banks 
2023, 23). We expect US regulators would set a debt target at one -third the TLAC target, as 
the Financial Stability Board (FSB) recommends, and perhaps for good reason—in principle, 
debtholders are more attuned than equity investors to downside risk. 13 The existence of 
both debt and equity also helps regulators clearly distinguish between going concern capital 
and gone concern LTD. Of course, a bank with more equity should enjoy lower costs of debt 
funding, too.  
Fourth, ensuring a minimum amount of TLAC and LTD requires continuous monitoring by 
banks and their supervisors. For example, one month before SVB’s fateful press release, First 
Republic redeemed USD 500 million of its senior debt, roughly two-thirds of its outstanding 
TLAC-able debt (SVB 2023c). The current US rules prevent G-SIBs from redeeming LTD if 
doing so would cause them to breach their TLAC or LTD requirements. In Eur ope, 
redemption of any MREL -eligible liability requires the resolution authority’s approval and 
supervisory consultation.14 The ex ante cost of this maintenance and supervision may seem 
onerous until we see the ex post cost of paying out depositors and managing contagion.  
A fundamental power of resolution authorities like the FDIC is the power to subordinate the 
claims of long -term unsecured debt to those of short -term unsecured debt. This ability to 
 
12 From the bank’s perspective, TLAC -eligible debt is generally more expensive than other types of debt but 
cheaper than equity. However, the composition of debt and equity changes the bank’s  incentives (Mendicino, 
Nikolov, and Suarez 2020). More equity may reduce risk-shifting behavior, but it may also reduce returns and 
thus encourage risk-taking. More debt may discipline bank management since it would incentivize monitoring 
by creditors, and therefore may prevent the bank’s insolvency long before a bail -in would be necessary, but it 
also affects the leverage ratio of these banks. Because preferred equity counts toward capital requirements 
without diluting shareholders, regulators should carefully consider how bail-in-able these instruments are. 
13 Debt is generally easier to price, and price volatility for a bank’s debt may offer regulators a market -based 
signal for directing supervisory resources. 
14 For banks engaged in market making, the European rules grant renewable, year-long exceptions to this prior 
permission mechanism. 
336
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 27 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
retrospectively discriminate among creditors is designed to reduce the run  incentive of 
depositors and other short-term debt holders.  
More importantly, the resolutions of these three banks demonstrate that the FDIC is willing 
to bail in shareholders and creditors. Nevertheless, the DIF will bear losses above this bail -
in to protect uninsured depositors. These losses are later socialized via special assessments 
on banks that, in turn, will seek to recoup these costs from consumers and other customers.  
The question boil s down to a difficult policy choice between increasing self -insurance 
through TLAC or increasing socialized insurance through the DIF. Bankers tend to prefer the 
latter: TLAC is a certain cost; and that debt and equity funding is considerably more 
expensive than deposit funding, and probably more expensive than any future special 
assessments. Regulators may lean more on TLAC, particularly for the larger banks, to avoid 
the risk of depleting the DIF and rendering the FDIC less able to cope with further contagion 
during times of financial stress.  
VI. Conclusions 
The post -mortem reports by the regulators of SVB and other failed banks , material loss 
reviews by inspectors general, and analysis by the Government Accountability Office focused 
almost exclusively on the failures of the banks’ manage ment and supervisors to address or 
even recognize the risks these banks were taking. All of these reports said little to nothing 
about the tailoring of banking r egulation, presumably viewing the regulatory framework 
itself as somehow out of scope.  
Our analysis points to the need for stronger banking rules to empower supervisors. Whether 
you believe that SVB’s supervisors had no idea of the risks the bank was taking, or you 
believe that they understood the risks but were unable or unwilling to challenge the 
management of a very profitable bank in a critical industry, regulation that considered 
excessive interest-rate risk and liquidity risk with clear consequences could have made a 
difference. In this case, both the IRR-BB and the LCR standards would have identified SVB as 
an outlier among large US banks. If the rules had been in place, supervisors also would have 
had a presumption to take action. 
Other countries’ banking systems did not experience these types of challenges despite 
significant increases in central bank policy rates and quantitative tightening  elsewhere 
following the pandemic. Despite taxpayer losses in excess of 3% of US GDP during the 1980s 
savings and loan crisis, the US prudential framework for banks still lacks guardrails on 
excessive interest -rate risk, a key risk to banks. Further, tailoring of US bank regulation 
means that management of liquidity risk and inclusion of interest-rate marks in bank capital 
differs markedly based on bank size. Finally, unconventional monetary policy remains a tool 
that the Fed may use again the future , even as these operations can increase asset -liability 
management risk at US banks through the creation and shrinkage of liquidity at the Fed and 
uninsured banking system deposits. 
337
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 28 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
SVB’s failure resulted in official sector protection of uninsured depositors through the 
systemic risk exception and the Federal Reserve’s creation of the Bank Term Funding 
Program. Following the failures of SVB, First Republic, and Signature, the l osses to the DIF 
and the FDIC’s special assessment on healthy US banks were significant and could have been 
lower if these banks also had been subject to TLAC requirements.  
Given the public expectation of government and central bank policy intervention in a crisis  
and already elevated levels of  US official sector debt, US bank supervision must emphasize 
ex ante crisis prevention  against the full breadth of bank risks, including interest -rate and 
liquidity risk.  
US bank regulation needs to include quantitative limits on interest -rate risk, liqui dity risk, 
and TLAC for more US banks —not just the systemic US banks. Such rules are particularly 
important given ongoing risks related to still above -target inflation, Treasury market 
fragility, growing risks to investor confidence in Treasuries, and the Fed’s use of 
unconventional monetary policy , which increases the volatility of both banking system 
liquidity and deposits.  
  
338
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 29 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
VII. References 
Bank of Portugal. 2020. “Interaction between Regulatory Minimum Requirements and 
Capital Buffers.” Financial Stability Report, June 2020. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5408/ 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). 2004. “Principles for the Management 
and Supervision of Interest Rate Risk.” Bank for International Settlements, July 2004. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5409/ 
———. 2013. “Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools.” 
Bank for International Settlements, January 2013.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5473 
———. 2014. “Basel III: The Net Stable Funding Ratio.” Bank for International Settlements, 
October 2014.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5410/ 
———. 2015. “TLAC Quantitative Impact Study Report.” Bank for International 
Settlements, November 2015.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5411/ 
———. 2016a. “Standards: Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book.” Bank for International 
Settlements, April 2016.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5412/ 
———. 2016b. “Standard: TLAC Holdings.” Bank for International Settlements, October 
2016.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5413/ 
———. 2025. “BCBS Dashboards.” Bank for International Settlements, 2025. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5402/ 
Benahmed, Riad. 2022. “Loss-Absorbing Capacity Requirements in Resolution for G-SIBs in 
the EU and the US: A Cross-Jurisdictional Comparison.” ACPR, Bank of France, Working 
Paper on Resolution, December.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5414/ 
Benoit, Mesnard. 2016. “Loss Absorbing Capacity in the Banking Union: TLAC 
Implementation and MREL Review,” July 7, 2016.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5415/ 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed). 1996. “FRB: Supervisory Letter on 
Joint Policy Statement on Interest Rate Risk,” May 23, 1996. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5417/ 
339
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 30 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
———. 2017. “Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity, Long-Term Debt, and Clean Holding 
Company Requirements for Systemically Important U.S. Bank Holding Companies and 
Intermediate Holding Companies of Systemically Important Foreign Banking 
Organizations.” 82 Fed. Reg. 8266, January 24, 2017. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5431/ 
———. 2019. “Requirements for Domestic and Foreign Banking Organizations.” Tailoring 
Rule, 2019.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5432/ 
———. 2020. “Final Rule to Implement a Net Stable Funding Ratio Requirement for Large 
Banking Organizations.” Draft Final Rule, October 20, 2020. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5450/ 
———. 2023a. “Re: Review of the Federal Reserve’s Supervision and Regulation of Silicon 
Valley Bank,” April 28, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4025/ 
———. 2023b. “Section 3300.1: Interest Risk Management.” In Commercial Bank 
Examination Manual. Washington, DC: The Federal Reserve. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5418/ 
———. 2024. “12 CFR Part 249 Subpart D -- Total Net Cash Outflow.” National Archives, 
December 12, 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5419/ 
———. 2025. “Capital Adequacy of Bank Holding Companies, Savings and Loan Holding 
Companies, and State Member Banks (Regulation Q).” 12 CFR Part 217, January 22, 2025. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5451/ 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (Fed and FDIC). 2022. “Resolution-Related Resource Requirements for Large 
Banking Organizations.” 87 Fed. Reg. 64170. R-1786, October 24, 2022. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5420/ 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (Fed, FDIC, and OCC). 2014. “Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio: Liquidity Risk Measurement Standards.” 79 Fed. Reg. 61440, October 10, 
2014.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/13123/ 
———. 2019. “Changes to Applicability Thresholds for Regulatory Capital and Liquidity 
Requirements.” 84 Fed. Reg. 59230, November 1, 2019. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5445/ 
340
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 31 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
———. 2020. “Agencies Issue Final Rule to Strengthen Resilience of Large Banks.” Joint 
press release, October 20, 2020.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5416/ 
———. 2023. “Long-Term Debt Requirements for Large Bank Holding Companies, Certain 
Intermediate Holding Companies of Foreign Banking Organizations, and Large Insured 
Depository Institutions.” 88 Fed. Reg. 64524, September 19, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5497 
Capital One Financial Corporation, Charles Schwab Corporation, PNC Financial Services 
Group, Truist Financial Corporation, and U.S. Bancorp (Non–G-SIB Banks). 2023. “Comment 
Letter to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation,” January 23, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5545 
Cetina, Jill. 2015. “Incorporating Liquidity Shocks and Feedbacks in Bank Stress Tests.” OFR 
Brief Series 15, no. 6: 7.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5421/ 
Cipriani, Marco, Thomas M. Eisenbach, and Anna Kovner. 2024. “Tracing Bank Runs in Real 
Time.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 1104, September 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4763/ 
Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton LLP (Cleary Gottlieb). 2015. “Comparing the Federal 
Reserve’s TLAC Proposal to the FSB TLAC Final Standards.” Alert Memorandum, November 
20, 2015.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5422/ 
European Banking Authority (EBA). 2017. “2015_1759 Group Solvency - Combined Buffer 
Requirements.” Single Rulebook Q&A, July 28, 2017. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5424/ 
———. 2020. “EBA Quantitative MREL Report.” EBA/REP/2022/09. EBA Reports, 
December 31, 2020.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5425/ 
———. 2023. “Other Systemically Important Institutions (O-SIIs).” Risk Monitoring, June 
12, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5426/ 
European Central Bank (ECB). 2024. “Capital Conservation Buffer.” European Systemic Risk 
Board, March 20, 2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5427/ 
341
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 32 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). n.d. “Special Assessment Pursuant to 
Systemic Risk Determination.” Accessed January 24, 2025. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5429/ 
Financial Stability Board (FSB). 2015. “Principles on Loss-Absorbing and Recapitalisation 
Capacity of G-SIBs in Resolution: Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) Term Sheet,” 
November 9, 2015.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5434/ 
First Republic Bank (First Republic). 2023. “Form 10-K.” Press release, February 13, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5202 
Gaul, Lewis, and Jonathan Jones. 2021. “CAMELS Ratings and Their Information Content.” 
OCC Working Paper No. WP-2021-01, January 6, 2021. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5470 
Gopalan, Yadav, and Joao Granja. 2023. “How (In)Effective Was Bank Supervision During 
the 2022 Monetary Tightening?” University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for 
Economics Working Paper No. 2023-130, September 29, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5472 
Gruenberg, Martin J. 2023. “Oversight of Financial Regulators: Financial Stability, 
Supervision, and Consumer Protection in the Wake of Recent Bank Failures.” Testimony of 
the FDIC Chairman before the US Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban 
Affairs, May 18, 2023. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5428/ 
Honohan, Patrick. 2023. “The Fed’s Recent Bank Stress Tests Used Scenarios with Little 
Variation. None Examined Higher Interest Rates.” The Peterson Institute for International 
Economics, March 27, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5437/ 
Mendicino, Caterina, Kalin Nikolov, and Javier Suarez. 2020. “Equity Versus Bail-In Debt in 
Banking: An Agency Perspective.” ESRB Working Paper Series, No. 2017/50, July 2020. 
https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=3723397 
Mitchell, Patrick. 2023. “Re: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Special Assessments 
Pursuant to Systemic Risk Determination.” Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, May 11, 
2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5438/ 
Office of Financial Research (OFR). 2015. Annual Report 2014. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5443/ 
  
342
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 33 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). 2020. “Interest Rate Risk (Version 1.0).” In 
Comptroller’s Handbook. Safety and Soundness Series. Washington, D.C.: Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5455/ 
———. 2024. “Interest Rate Risk Statistics Report [Fall 2024],” October 21, 2024. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5442/ 
Roffler, Michael J. 2023. “Comment Letter to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,” January 23, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5435/ 
Rossolillo, Nicholas. 2021. “SVB Financial Group Is the Best Bank Stock Nobody’s Talking 
About.” Motley Fool, May 16, 2021.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5407/ 
Silicon Valley Bank Financial Group (SVB). 2022. “Systemic Risk Report—FR Y-15 [SVB 
Financial Group],” December 31, 2022.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5423/ 
———. 2023a. “SVB Q4 2022 Financial Highlights,” January 19, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5448/ 
———. 2023b. “Form 10-K,” February 24, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5447/ 
———. 2023c. “SVB Financial Group Announces Proposed Offerings of Common Stock and 
Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock.” Press release, March 8, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5546/ 
Single Resolution Board (SRB). 2023. “SRB MREL Dashboard Q4.2022,” May 15, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5449/ 
US Congress. 2021. “Section 5. Deposit Insurance.” Federal Deposit Insurance Act, August 
31, 2021. 12 CFR Part 330, August 31, 2021.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5430/ 
US Securities and Exchange Commission (US SEC). 1997. “Questions and Answers about the 
New ‘Market Risk’ Disclosure Rules,” July 31, 1997.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5454/ 
 
  
343
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 34 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
VIII. Appendixes 
Appendix A: LCR Calculations for SVB 
Appendix A describes our liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) calculations for Silicon Valley Bank 
(SVB) (Figure 11). The caveat is that we were limited to public reports —the company’s 10-
K, Y-15 systemic risk report, call reports, and investor presentations. The Fed eral Reserve 
did require the company to submit the FR 2052A liquidity monitoring report, but that is not 
publicly available. We believe we made the most of the information that was publicly 
available.15  
  
 
15 Note that this piece focuses on SVB. A similar analysis of First Republic Bank suggests it also would have been 
out of compliance with the LCR if it had been required to meet it. I ts Form 10-K for 2022 notes that, although 
the LCR didn’t apply, the bank had USD 26 billion in high -quality liquid assets  (HQLAs). But that would be its 
HQLA ignoring the haircuts and cap on Level 2 assets that the LCR rule imposes. Based on the rule, its  HQLA 
would have been about USD 10 billion. Meanwhile, First Republic had USD 176 billion in deposits, of which 
about one-third was insured; USD 51 billion in commitments; USD 10 billion in short-term Federal Home Loan 
Bank commitments; and minimal inflows . Assuming a 3% drawdown for insured deposits and 10% for 
uninsured deposits (generously) gets an LCR of roughly 50%, before the 70% adjustment for banks with less 
than USD 250 billion in assets (First Republic 2023). 
344
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 35 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 11: LCR Calculations 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; YPFS analysis.  
345
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 36 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
LCR Numerator: High-Quality Liquid Assets 
High-quality liquid assets ( HQLAs) were relatively easy to calculate. Level 1 assets are 
considered the most liquid assets and enter the numerator with no haircut. They include 
reserve balances with the central bank, government debt, and government -guaranteed 
securities. At the end of 2022, SVB  had USD 31.7 billion in Level 1 assets: USD 7.8 billion in 
reserve balances ; USD 16.2 billion in US Treasuries ; and USD 7.7 billion in mortgage 
securities issued by Ginnie Mae, which the government fully guarantees. Level 2A assets are 
considered somewhat riskier and receive a 15% haircut. They include government agency 
debt and agency mortgage -backed securities. SVB had more than USD 60 billion in agency 
mortgage-backed securities. However, under the LCR rules, Level 2 A assets can’t be more 
than 40% of total HQLA, so SVB’s Level 2A assets would have been capped at USD 21.2 billion.  
Total HQLA: USD 52.9 billion.  
LCR Denominator: Cash Outflows 
The denominator is harder to calculate and open to some interpretation. If SVB had been 
subject to the rule, its management would have had to hammer out all of the issues in the 
following paragraphs with its Fed supervisors, using far more detailed data disclosures than 
the company was required to make to the public.  
To compute outflows , the LCR rules assume stressed runoff rates for each type of bank 
liability based on experience in past crises and on management and supervisory judgment. 
SVB had USD 173.1 billion in  deposits at the end of 2022. Of those, USD 165.4 billion were 
uninsured: USD 151.5 billion were uninsured deposits in US offices that exceeded the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) insurance limit; another USD 13.9 billion were foreign 
deposits, which the FDIC doesn’t insure (see the company’s last Form 10-K [SVB 2023b]). 
We assume d the remaining USD 7.7 billion was insured. Under the US rules, stressed 
outflows for insured deposits range from 3% to 40%: 3% for retail and small business 
customers, and 5% to 40% for wholesale customers that are not financial companie s. We 
assumed an average 5% runoff of insured deposits. That yield ed a small outflow of USD 
0.4 billion.  
Calculating outflows on the USD 165.4 billion in uninsured deposits was the largest part of 
SVB’s LCR and require d the most judgment. These were also the depositors who ran the 
bank, so it is important to understand how the rule would have treated them ex ante.  
Within the uninsured deposit category, the LCR rules makes key distinctions:  
• Retail clients are considered more loyal (sticky) and less likely to run than wholesale 
clients.  
• Among wholesale accounts, operational deposits—deposits that customers need to 
place with a bank in order to use services such as payment settlement systems, and 
don’t bear interest —are considered stickier than nonoperational deposits —which 
346
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 37 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
are interest bearing; the rules assume these depositors are more likely to switch to 
other banks to get better rates.  
• Also among wholesale accounts, nonfinanc ial company deposits are considered 
stickier than financial company deposits. 
SVB reported its end -2022 short-term wholesale funding in its Y -15 Systemic Risk Report , 
as the Fed requires  (SVB 2022) . Uninsured, nonfinancial wholesale deposits were USD 
109.6 billion; uninsured, financial wholesale deposits were USD 28.8 billion. It is typically 
difficult to estimate from public filings how much of a bank’s deposits are operational, but 
the company in a January 2023 investor presentation said that 47% of clients’ funds were in 
“operating cash typically held in on -balance sheet, noninterest -bearing deposits ” (SVB 
2023a, 11). Accepting the company’s definition of “operating” and applying that proportion 
yielded USD 65 billion in operational uninsured deposits fro m both financial and 
nonfinancial customers, which have a 25% runoff factor under the rule; USD 58.1 billion in 
nonoperational uninsured deposits from nonfinancial customers (40%); and USD 15.3 
billion in nonoperational uninsured deposits from financial cu stomers (100%). The 
combined outflow from uninsured wholesale clients came to USD 54.7 billion. 
We assume d the remaining USD 27.1 billion of uninsured deposits were retail or small 
business. Applying the 10% runoff factor under the rule yielded an outflow of USD 2.7 billion. 
The LCR rules also require a bank to assume that its customers draw down on a portion of 
their outstanding lines of credit and other commitments. The drawdown rates are 5% for 
commitments to retail customers, 10% or 30% for nonfinancial  wholesale customers, and 
40% for financial entities other than banks (Fed 2024, part 249.32 [e][1]). SVB had USD 62.2 
billion in such commitments at the end of 2022; assuming a 20% average drawdown rate, 
the outflow would have been USD 12.5 billion.  
Finally, SVB had USD 13.6 billion in short -term borrowings, of which USD 13 billion were 
advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) of San Francisco. The outflow for such 
borrowings was 25%, or USD 3.4 billion. 
The total cash outflow came to USD 73.7 billion. 
LCR Denominator: Cash Inflows 
Next, inflows. The LCR allows banks to subtract contractual inflows  from their estimate of 
30-day outflows, according to the LCR guidelines (BCBS 2013, para. 142).  
Contractual inflows may include loans that are scheduled to mature during the 30 -day 
period. The rules then allow banks to treat half of such repayments as in flows. However, a 
close look at SVB’s USD 73.6 billion portfolio of performing loans suggests that it should have 
counted on very little of those loans to be repaid over 30 days. 
347
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 38 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
First, of that total, USD 46 billion were revolving loans (SVB 2023b, 132–33). Borrowers are 
expected to roll over such loans , and they are not included in inflows, per the US final rule: 
“With respect to revolving credit facilities, already drawn amounts would not have been 
included in a covered company's inflow amount ” (Fed, FDIC, and OCC 2014). To make clear 
why such loans should not be considered inflows in SVB’s case, note that about USD 40 billion 
of the total represent ed loans to private equity or venture capital funds. According to the 
company: “The vast majority of this por tfolio consists of capital call lines of credit, the 
repayment of which is dependent on the payment of capital calls by the underlying limited 
partner investors in the funds managed by these firms ” (SVB 2023b, 70). Surely, it makes 
sense that the rules would not expect SVB to be able to demand that venture capital investors 
repay their revolving loans in stressed market conditions. 
Eliminating the revolving loans left USD 27.6 billion in term loans. These included USD 6.1 
billion in “investor-dependent” loans. Borrowers of these loans may have required 
additional equity financing from venture capital firms or other investors, or in some cases a 
successful sale to a third party or an IPO, according to the company’s 10-K (SVB 2023b, 70). 
Further, the risk of “prolonged market volatility  . . . particularly applies to Investor 
Dependent loans, where repayment is dependent on the borrower’s ability to fundraise or 
exit” (74). Without specific backing from the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
guidelines or the agencies’ final rule, it wouldn’t have been prudent to assume repayment of 
investor-dependent loans in stressed market conditions. Of the remaining USD 21.5 billion 
in term loans, less than USD 3 billion would have matured in under one year (SVB 2023b, 
73). Assuming one-twelfth of those loans paid back at maturity within 30 days and applying 
the 50% haircut in the rule gave a cash inflow of USD 0.1 billion. 
SVB reported USD 5.3 billion in deposits at other financial institutions. Under the rules, banks 
can’t include operational deposits in their inflow estimates, since “these deposits are 
required for operational reasons, and are therefore not available to the depositing bank to 
repay other outflows” (BCBS 2013, para. 98). The US regulators’ final rule in 2014 similarly 
excluded “any inflows derived from amounts that a covered company holds in operational 
deposits at other regulated financial companies . . . [T]he agencies reasoned that it would be 
unlikely that a covered company would be able to withdraw these funds in a crisis to meet 
other liquidity needs, and therefore excluded them ” (Fed, FDIC, and OCC 2014) . However, 
it’s impossible to tell from the public filings how much of SVB’s bank deposits were 
operational. We assume d 50% were operational. That yielded an inflow of USD 2.6 billion, 
using the 100% factor in the rule. 
Cash inflows: USD 2.8 billion. Net outflows: USD 71 billion. 
The resulting LCR is 75%: 52.9/71. 
  
348
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 39 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Appendix B: NSFR Calculations for SVB 
As in the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) calculations, we made the most of publicly available 
information. Interpretations of the rule were largely based on the memo that Federal 
Reserve Board staff published with the press release in 2020 (Fed 2020). The company may 
have reported different figures if supervisors had required it to report its net stable funding 
ratio (NSFR). 
The NSFR applies multipliers, called factors, to reflect the relative stability of each funding 
source in the numerator and the relative long -term nature of each asset that n eeds funding 
in the denominator. For example, in the numerator, capital and long -term debt are 
considered 100% stable and insured retail deposits are considered 95% stable; the more of 
these liabilities, the better. Uninsured wholesale deposits get a much lower stable funding 
factor of 0% to 50%, depending on nuances that we discuss below. 
In the denominator, loans  with more than one year left to mature typically require a lot of 
stable funding. Their required stable funding factors range from 65% for relatively low-risk, 
nonfinancial loans to 100% for long-term financial loans.  
Most securities, however, are considered short -term holdings and require far less stable 
funding. The most liquid securities, which regulators consider to be Level 1 high-quality 
liquid assets (HQLAs)—central bank reserves, US Treasuries, and other government-backed 
securities—don’t require any stable funding at all. Level 2A HQLAs require 15% stable 
funding. These include agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) issued by the government-
sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which dominated Silicon Valley Bank’s 
(SVB’s) portfolio.  
NSFR Numerator: Available Stable Funding 
SVB had USD 17.9 billion in regulatory capital and USD 5.4 billion in long -term debt at the 
end of 2022, contributing a total of USD 23.3 billion in available stable funding based on the 
100% funding factor in the rule. Insured retail deposits of USD 7.7 billion contributed USD 
7.3 billion (95%); uninsured small business and retail deposits of USD 27.1 billion, based on 
our estimates, contributed USD 24.4 billion (90%).  
The bank also reported USD 13 billion in short -term funding from the Federal Home Loan 
Banks. The rule (Fed, FDIC, and OCC 2020, 105)  attributes a 50% available stable funding 
factor to such debt, resulting in a contribution of USD 6.5 billion. 
The rule appropriately considers uninsured wholesale deposits to be far less stable than 
insured deposits. And it considers deposits that customers need for their operations (for 
example, payment settlement) to be more stable than other deposits. Operation al deposits 
from financial or nonfinancial companies receive a 50% funding factor. Nonoperational 
deposits receive a 50% factor if they are from nonfinancial companies and a 0% factor if they 
are from financial companies.  
349
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 40 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
As with the LCR, one of the challenges in estimating NSFRs with only public information was 
the allocation of uninsured wholesale deposits between the operational and nonoperational 
categories. Again accepting the company’s definition of “operating” from its January 2023 
investor presenta tion suggested a 47%/53% breakdown between operational and 
nonoperational deposits (SVB 2023a). These assumptions yielded available funding of USD 
32.5 billion from operational deposits and USD 29 billion from nonoperational deposits held 
by nonfinancial companies.  
Total available stable funding: USD 123 billion.  
NSFR Denominator: Required Stable Funding 
As noted, the NSFR rules are generous for securities that qualify as HQLAs, because they 
assume repurchase agreement ( repo) funding availability. And the NSFR—like the LCR, in 
fact—doesn’t distinguish between held -to-maturity securities and securities that a bank 
holds for sale or trading. Thus, the NSFR rule would have treated SVB’s agency MBS as Level 
2A HQLAs with a required stable funding factor of just 15% of their carrying value.  
The bank held USD 85.1 billion in agency MBS. Of that, USD 2 billion were pledged to the 
Federal Home Loan Banks for more than one year; the rule considers such encumbered 
securities to be unavailable, so they required 100% stable funding. The remaining USD 83.1 
billion—of which 97% was held -to-maturity—would have required just USD 12.5 billion in 
stable funding.  
The bank held an additional USD 8.1 billion of Level 2B HQLAs, like municipal bonds, also 
held-to-maturity. They carried a 50% required stable funding factor, so they would have 
required USD 4.1 billion in stable funding. 
SVB had USD 62.5 billion in undrawn commitments to provide credit or liquidity to its clients. 
These carried a 5% funding factor, resulting in USD 3.1 billion in required stable funding. We 
also assume d USD 3 billion in required stable funding to back SVB’s deposits with other 
banks and USD 2.7 billion to back nonmarketable securities. 
Loans would have contribute d the bulk of SVB’s required stable funding, even though they 
made up only one-third of the bank’s balance sheet. More than half of the bank’s loans were 
revolving loans ( USD 40.5 billion total) from SVB’s Global Fund Banking business line. We 
assumed these would have had a 100% required funding factor in the rule, assuming clients 
had the ability to roll them over indefinitely; relaxing that assumption could have reduced 
required funding by about USD 20 billion. The bank’s 2022 Form 10-K noted that repayment 
of much of its loans were dependent upon clients’ receipt of funding from third parties (SVB 
2023b, 19). During stressed conditions, it seems fair to say that SVB couldn’t have been sure 
when clients would have repaid these loans. 
There was another USD 5.5 billion in revolving loans and USD 18.4 billion in other loans to 
nonfinancial institutions, mostly carrying an 85% required funding factor. These would have 
required USD 4.7 billion and USD 14.2 billion in stable funding, respectively. A small amount 
350
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 41 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
of non-revolving financial loans would have required USD 0.4 billion. Residential mortgages 
(USD 9.1 billion) would have required USD 5.9 billion, based on a 65% risk factor.  
Total required funding for loans: USD 65.8 billion. 
Total required stable funding: USD 93.1 billion. 
The resulting NSFR is 132%: 123/93.1. 
Figure 12: NSFR Calculations 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; YPFS analysis. 
351
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 42 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Appendix C: TLAC Calculations for SVB and Other Failed Banks 
We sought to calculate whether the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s existing total 
loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) rules, as tailored by European regulators, could have saved 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s Deposit Insurance Fund money by allowing it 
to bail in more long-term debt (LTD) creditors. In short, our analysis show ed that the three 
failed banks did not have sufficient LTD at the level or composition that regulators would 
have required for an effective bail-in.  
Not all LTD can ef fectively absorb losses; following the Financial Stability Board’s 2015 
recommendations, regulators require any TLAC debt to be unsecured and subordinated to 
depositors and other protected creditors (FSB 2015). Seeking a simple and straightforward 
bail-in, US regulators in their implementation of the Basel standard have gone a step further 
by requiring debt instruments to be “plain vanilla, ” that is, without convertibility or 
derivative-linked features, such as call options. European Union (EU) regulators, on the other 
hand, are more generous in what qualifies as TLAC, accepting more Tier 2 instruments, 
structured notes, and other convertible  regulatory capital instruments, which the US does 
not accept16 (Cleary Gottlieb 2015). 
Of course, TLAC would be one requirement of many already applied by regulators. For 
example, these three banks were also subject to a capital conservation buffer of 2.5% of their 
risk-weighted assets ( RWAs), which they had to meet entirely with common equity Tier 1 
(CET1) capital (Fed 2025). If they breached their minimum capital requirements plus this 
buffer (that is, a total CET1 ratio of 7%), regulators would force th e banks to pause capital 
distributions. To ensure that TLAC is unencumbered, banks cannot count CET1 for both their 
required buffers and their TLAC requirement. (This is  also true of global systemically 
important banks (G-SIBs), which are subject to more and larger buffers [Fed 2017].) For our 
calculation, we earmarked 2.5% of the banks’ RWAs to meet this buffer, meaning it could not 
count toward TLAC (BCBS 2016b). 
Our analysis applie d the EU’s threshold for similarly sized banks, which is 13.5% of risk -
weighted assets. 17 We also appl ied the US rules for eligible instruments and debt -equity 
composition. That is, we expected an LTD target of 4.5% of RWAs, or one-third of the 13.5% 
TLAC target, and an equity target of 9% of RWAs.  
Based on our calculations, these three US banks would have had a combined equity and LTD 
shortfall of USD 13.6 billion under these assumptions:  
 
16 There are many differences in the US and EU rules. For example, regulators in the US and EU only count LTD 
with a residual maturity of at least one year, but the US goes further by haircutting eligible LTD by 50% if it 
matures in less than two years (Cleary Gottlieb 2015).  This is a material  difference in rulemaking, but for the 
purposes of our analysis, we left this issue aside , since all the eligible LTD issued by these three banks had 
remaining maturities of greater than two years. 
17  We did not use the leverage exposure measure since these  banks, unlike G -SIBs, were not subject to 
consistent leverage reporting requirements. 
352
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 43 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Silicon Valley Bank. At year -end 2022, Silicon Valley Bank ’s (SVB’s) liabilities included 
enough TLAC -eligible equity and debt instruments to exceed the EU’s minimum 13.5% 
threshold. However, those instruments were mostly CET1 or preferred stock, and long-term 
debt made up just 3% of RWAs. To meet that part of the US stan dards, SVB would have had 
to raise an additional USD 1.7 billion in LTD or convert some of its excess capital into LTD. 
Signature Bank. At the same point in time,  Signature’s TLAC ratio was only 7.1%, 
substantively all of which was in CET1. To comply with a 13.5% TLAC threshold and a 4.5% 
LTD threshold, Signature would have had to raise another USD 3.5 billion in LTD. On the 
capital side, we assume d Signature would set aside enough CET1 to continue its capital 
distributions. Excluding the CET1 that would have met the capital conservation buffer (2.5% 
of RWA) would have placed Signature in a TLAC -capital deficit of USD 2.3 billion. The 
combined shortfall was USD 5.8 billion. 
First Republic. First Republic had only USD 779 million in long -term senior notes 
outstanding, and a TLAC ratio of 9.5% at year -end 2022. To meet our hypothetical 
requirements, First Republic would have had to raise an additional USD 6.1 billion in LTD.  
  
353
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.

--- Page 44 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 13: TLAC Deficit Calculations 
 
Sources: Company financial reports; YPFS analysis. 
354
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 45 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
 
 
355
How US Bank Regulation Failed SVB and Its Supervisors Feldberg et al.