--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Philip Lane Lessons Learned: Philip Lane 
Mary Anne Chute Lynch 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Chute Lynch, Mary Anne and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2025) "Lessons Learned: Philip Lane," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 718-721. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1641 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/31 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/31

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Philip Lane 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Philip Lane served as governor of the Central Bank of Ireland from 2015 to 2019. He introduced 
countercyclical capital and systemic buffer tools and initiated research into the role and risks 
of cross-border inflows across Ireland. As a member of the Governing Council  of the European 
Central Bank (ECB) since 2015 , Lane has advocated for t he European Union to adopt 
macroprudential policies and tools. He hailed the work of the European Systemic Risk Board  
and similar institutions established after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the European 
Sovereign Debt Crisis to share data, information concerning risks, and concerns over financial 
stability. He was named chief economist of the ECB in 2019.  This summary is based on an 
interview with Lane in January 2023; the full transcript can be accessed here. 
Guarantees can be powerful tools, but policymakers should consider the unknowns of 
a crisis and calibrate guarantees for maximum effectiveness and minimal risk. 
Ireland was one of several countries that issued broa d-based guarantees of its banking 
system during the GFC , guaranteeing the liabilities of its six major banks. However, the 
guarantee almost overwhelmed the government and caused a Sovereign Debt C risis. Lane 
explained that Ireland’s calculations underlying the guarantee were based on point-in-time 
valuations that “looked okay” when made and indicated that the government could carry the 
guarantee. However, the underlying assumptions turned out to be too conservative; as the 
unprecedented crisis evolved, it threw everything out of joint. Lane elaborated: 
I would say, even in September ’08, you could stand by it [the guarantee] because at 
that point the scale of the property price declines was not that big. It’s what happened 
next, from late September to April ’09, when the critical G-20 meeting took place that 
marked a turning point. In that period, the scale of the further declines in the economy 
[and] property prices went way beyond the government’s calculations. Even from the 
point of September ’08, it was essentially an issue of the frame of reference being too 
narrow. The calculation of the worst -case scenario was too optimistic because they 
were essentially dealing with this as a typical small economy crash as opposed to a 
global meltdown. 
Lane also postulated that, in hindsight, the guarantee might have been tailored in such a way 
as to narrow it without limiting its intended effectiveness. The guarantee  covered all 
depositors, even though the banks had many large deposits from global financial institutions 
seeking high interest rates that were very liable to run: 
Typically, you might say, we need to protect depositors because it would be too much 
of a macro shock [not to]. But that’s different when a lot of the depositors are global 
investors who can look after themselves, and it wouldn’t necessarily have a bad effect 
in the Irish economy if they left. In terms of optimal policy, having a sharper 
718

--- Page 4 ---
differentiation between small depositors and large depositors probably should have 
been looked at more seriously. . . .   
Maybe it’s not terrible to have limited guarantees. It is the extent of the guarantee, 
because the guarantee also included a lot of subordinated debt mostly held by global 
investors.  
Recapitalizing banks early in a crisis is critical, but government officials  should 
carefully assess the source of funding to reduce sovereign debt risks. 
Despite Ireland’s broad guarantee, the government still had to recapitalize its banks , Lane 
said. “That’s part of the mantra [in Europe], and it’s also in the US. Having significant early 
recapitalization can be a good idea.” But, he posited, there are factors that might cause a delay 
in recapitalization, intended or not.  
In Ireland ’s case , Lane explained, there were at least two factors at play. First, Ireland 
benefited from being a part of the eurozone: 
Being a member of the euro provided a lot of insulation. We would have had a very 
different situation without the euro, the common currency. Euro membership made 
it less of an acute crisis because the banks could receive liquidity immediately, and 
the amount of cross -border liquidity was really big. So, in terms of international 
accounting, there’s a very big inward liquidity support from the ECB. The good side 
of that is it’s stabilizing. The downside is, it’s a temptation to postpone restructuring 
and so on . T hat was ultimately necessary. What happened was , over the first six 
months or a year, autumn or winter to spring ’09, everything got worse. 
Second, by the time Ireland was compelled to recapitalize its banks in 2010, the government 
could not afford to do so on its own. It was on the verge of a Sovereign Debt C risis and 
reluctantly decided to seek assistance from the I nternational Monetary Fund (IMF) . Lane 
explained:  
The interesting question is, if Ireland had gone [to the IMF] six months earlier, would 
it have been better? In terms of the timing, obviou sly, the world doesn ’t want a 
situation where people would , in any kind of difficulty, immediately go to the IMF. 
From a political point of view, it ’s embarrassing. There’s a stigma effect. But from an 
economic point of view, earlier can sometimes, I think , be better. There were in 
November 2010, when this program was being set up, a lot of people, including the 
IMF, who were very pessimistic about the future of the economy , the future of the 
banks, so  they wrote in very high numbers for the recapitalization of the banking 
system. 
According to Lane, the Irish government “had to borrow so much in order to recapitalize the 
banking system [that] it became a sovereign debt issue. ” As a result, in 2010, Ireland had a 
budget deficit of 32% of GDP  compared with 11% in 2008. “Everyone can agree 
recapitalization is important, ” commented Lane, “ but how do you trade that off against 
putting the sovereign in danger?“ 
719
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Lane praised governments most severely impacted by the onset of the Sovereign Debt Crisis 
for turning to a rescue package from the I MF, EU, and others.  As in Ireland ’s case, he 
emphasized that there could be latent benefits: “Going to the official funding, stepping away 
from market funding for three years, allowed time for the economy to restructure, for the 
banking sector problems to be cleaned up .” Given this, Lane concluded, “encouraging a 
country in trouble to accept IMF funding earlier rather than waiting too long is probably a 
universal lesson.” 
The reforms and macro  tools implemented in response to a crisis can act as 
preemptive stabilizers when the next crisis occurs.  
When Ireland emerged from its IMF program in 2023, its long-term future and recovery were 
still uncertain. Lane explained the preemptive measures that the central bank implemented: 
Mortgage limits and countercyclical capital buffers  helped stabilize the recovery . The 
mortgage limits were “ significant restrictions on individuals in terms of the loan -to-value 
ratio, but also the debt-to-income ratio,” Lane said. While not without some downside, these 
limits mitigated against the formation of another housing bubble  and proved their worth  
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Lane pointed out, “In the pandemic, the mortgages issued 
since the reforms turned out to be less problematic than mortgages issued under looser rules 
earlier on.” 
The countercyclical capital buffers required banks in Ireland to carry higher capital-to-asset 
ratios. In times of  stress, such as the COVID pandemic, the extra capital was released to 
absorb unusual losses. While the buffers may lead to some lesser lending—“the banks might 
be more reluctant to provide credit if they have to maintain the higher ratios”—Lane was of 
the opinion that the measures worked well during the pandemic. He said, “The pandemic, I 
think, was a vindication of the argument ; we don’t know what the future is going to bring. 
We didn’t know a pandemic was coming, and therefore you’re better off having roughly high 
capital ratios in the banking system.” 
“One of the big lessons of ’08 and afterward,” Lane observed, “was the toxic combination of 
a financial crisis intersecting with a deep recession, both feeding on each other .” He noted 
that in Europe and the United States, “there was a determination that the pandemic did not 
create a deep and durable recession. This led to pretty big fiscal interventions. ” Although 
many countries have experienced heightened inflation, Lane asser ted that households and 
firms are in good shape because of government actions before and during the pandemic.  
What’s really important to remember , according to Lane , is “the interconnection between 
[preventive] macro [policies] and financial stability.” Taking a few steps to limit risk before 
a crisis can better prepare firms, households , and the economy to survive . “ Keeping the 
households and the firms in good shape , ” Lane said,  “avoids the kind of accelerators and 
amplifiers that can create a big economic downturn. For financial stability, avoiding a big 
macro downturn is probably a pretty good idea.”  
720
Lessons Learned: Philip Lane Chute Lynch and Wiggins

--- Page 6 ---
His last point was most poignant: “It’s also a willingness to recognize in thes e severe crises, 
that the appropriate risk absorber is the government rather than asking households and 
firms to absorb too much risk.” 
Dated: April 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No: 2022–25 
 
 
721
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1