--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Owen Heaphy 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Anmol Makhija 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Stella Schaefer-Brown 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Greg Feldberg 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
See next page for additional authors 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Wiggins, Rosalind Z.; Heaphy, Owen; Makhija, Anmol; Schaefer-Brown, Stella; Feldberg, Greg; and Metrick, 
Andrew (2025) "Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 
2, 1-40. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1647 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/1 
This Survey is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions 
Authors Authors 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins, Owen Heaphy, Anmol Makhija, Stella Schaefer-Brown, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew 
Metrick 
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This survey is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol7/iss2/1

--- Page 3 ---
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions1 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins,2 Owen Heaphy,3 Anmol Makhija,4 Stella Schaefer-Brown,5  
Greg Feldberg,6 and Andrew Metrick7 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Survey 
June 25, 2025 
Abstract 
In this paper, we analyze seven case studies involving bank holidays and two involving mutual 
fund suspensions produced by the Yale Program on Financial Stability. Our main purpose is to 
assist policymakers who are considering utilizing a bank holiday in d esigning the most 
effective program as efficiently as possible. We find that a bank holiday may be most useful 
when designing and implementing a comprehensive remedy to an underlying problem 
distressing banks, particularly when an exogenous shock rather th an balance sheet 
weaknesses is the cause of general distress to the system.  A holiday is also useful to “ring-
fence” one or more banks and differentiate them from banks that are not distressed. In either 
case, the holiday only pauses the run. For a successful outcome, and to avoid a restart of runs, 
policymakers should be prepared to implement corrective actions to address the 
fundamental problem and commit to reopening only viable banks. However, we also 
conclude that, given the nature of bank holidays and depositor expectations regarding access 
to runnable assets, in most cases, the utility of a bank holiday is limited  by the high risk of 
contagion and depositor behavior. For the banking sector, authorities  are best advised  to 
establish credible ex ante deposit insurance, effectively communicated and bolstered by a 
rigorous bank supervisory regime and a tailored resolution process, to prevent bank runs 
from occurring in the first place. We also find that suspensions of mutual fund investors’ 
withdrawals can function similarly to bank holidays and carry a stigma that may lead  
administrators to avoid implementing them.  
Keywords: bank holidays, capital, deposit insurance, emergency liquidity, gate s, 
restructuring, suspensions, withdrawal restrictions 
 
 
1 This survey reviews a Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project case 
studies considering bank holidays and fund suspensions. The cases underlying the survey are available from 
the Journal of Financial Crises at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2. 
2 Director, Global Financial Crisis Project, and Lecturer in Management, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
3 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
4 Former Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
5 Senior Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
6 Research Scholar and Director of Research, YPFS, Yale School of Management . 
7 Janet L. Yellen Professor of Finance and Management and YPFS Program Director, Yale School of Management. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
Introductory Note: This survey is an analysis of important considerations for policymakers 
seeking to establish a bank holiday or mutual fund suspension  program. It is based on 
insights derived from case studies of nine specific bank holiday and fund suspension  
programs the Yale Program on Financial Stability has completed and from the existing 
literature on the topic. While this survey can help inform a decision about whether or not to 
establish a  bank holiday or fund suspension program, our main purpose is to assist 
policymakers who have already made that decision in designing the most effective program 
possible. In analyzing the programs that are the focus of this survey, we used a color -coded 
system to highlight certain particularly noteworthy design features.  
This highlighting is not intended to be dispositive. The fact that a design feature is not 
highlighted or is highlighted yellow does not mean that it should not be considered or that it 
will never be effective under any circumstances. Similarly, the fact that a design feature is 
not highlighted or is highlighted blue does not mean that it should always be considered or 
will be effective under all circumstances. The highlighting is our subjective attempt to guide 
Treatment Meaning 
BLUE – INTERESTING A design feature that is interesting and that 
policymakers may want to consider. Typically, 
this determination is based on the observation 
that the design feature involves a unique and 
potentially promising way of addressing a 
challenge common to this type of program that 
may not be obvious. Less commonly, empirical 
evidence or a consensus will indicate that the 
design feature was effective in this context, in 
which case we wi ll describe that evidence or 
consensus. 
YELLOW – CAUTION INDICATED A design feature that policymakers should 
exercise caution in considering. Typically, this 
determination is based on the observation that 
the designers of the feature later made 
significant changes to the feature with the 
intention of improving the program. Less 
commonly, empirical evidence or a consensus 
will indicate that the design feature was 
ineffective in this context, in which case we will 
describe that evidence or consensus. 
FOOTNOTE IN ITALICS  
 
Where the reason that a given design feature 
has been highlighted is not apparent from the 
text, it is accompanied by an italicized footnote 
that explains why we chose to highlight it. 
Where necessary, these footnotes will be used 
to identify any considerations that should be 
kept in mind when thinking about the feature. 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
readers toward certain design features that (1) may not be obvious but are worth 
considering or (2) require caution.  
3
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 6 ---
Introduction 
In a banking crisis, depositors may rush to withdraw their money if they lose confidence in 
the viability of the bank s and there is no credible government insurance . In a classic bank 
run, the bank may be on the verge of nonviability8 within days. If depositors believe that  
other banks also are unstable, the run can spread throughout the system. Facing continued 
runs, policymakers provide liquidity and reassurance, which may work to calm the situation. 
But if it does not, policymakers may have few options and, in extreme situations, may impose 
a bank holiday to stop the run and buy time to address the underlying problem. 
In this survey, we review seven case studies involving bank holidays , defined as an almost 
total stoppage of bank operations affecting one or more banks. (We will sometimes refer to 
the latter case as a “broad-based” holiday.) The cases we cover occurred between 1933 and 
2020 and involved six countries: the United States, Argentina, Cyprus, Ecuador, Greece, and 
India. (See F igure 1 for a  complete listing of the cases survey ed.) One of the seven cases  
considered a moratorium on an individual bank (India–Yes Bank 2020); one involved banks 
and credit unions within a single American state (US–Rhode Island 1991) ; and a ll others 
concerned broad-based holidays impacting most of a country’s banking system. Of this latter 
group, one case study addresse d the national holiday imposed in the United States during 
the Great Depression (US 1933), and the others examined emerging-market countries that 
imposed bank holidays in recent decades (Argentina 2001, Cyprus 2013, Ecuador 1999, and 
Greece 201 5). Apart from  Ecuador 199 9 and US–Rhode Island 1991 , the bank holidays 
surveyed were motivated by exogenous shocks that did not originate in the banking systems. 
We also review two cases involving mutual funds that suspended investor redemptions. Like 
depositors at banks , i nvestors in mutual funds may rush to redeem their shares if they 
believe their funds are at risk. Funds, however, are subject to different regul atory regimes 
than banks; they typically do not benefit from a lender of last resort or any kind of deposit 
insurance. Notably, while a governing authority or regulator implements bank holidays, the 
fund administrator itself may initiate fund suspensions (a total halt to redemptions) or gates 
(a restriction on the amount that can be withdrawn) ; an authority typically must approve 
the action. In a crisis, a gate may serve a purpose similar to a bank holiday, pausing 
redemptions so that a fund may evaluate its situation and apply corrective measures (Lestz 
2011). Funds may also use gates in times of stress to avoid a suspension.9 
 
8 In most cases, officials considered more than the literal, or accounting, solvency of a bank when assessing  
whether a bank could reopen. Instead, they tended to evaluate the importance of the institutions as a going 
concern, with consideration given to the effect of future policy interventions. For this survey, we use “solvency” 
when policymakers are specifically accounting whether an institution has assets in excess of its liabilities and 
“viability” when policymakers are making mo re general judgments about the soundness of a financial 
institution. For a discussion of the viability versus solvency distinction, see Kelly et al. (2025). 
9 During noncrisis times, gates are useful to:  
(1) reduce the risk of over-concentration in certain investments (due to sales of more liquid investments 
to raise cash while retaining less liquid investments that cannot be easily sold) by providing limits on 
overall redemptions without having to resort to a suspension; (2) permit investors to be relatively assured 
of redeeming a certain proportion of their investment on a given redemption date  . . .; and (3) reduce the 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1: Case Studies, Abbreviated Names, and Type of Holiday or Suspension 
Case Name 
Short-form  
Case Name  
Type of Holiday or 
Suspension Reference 
Bank Holidays 
Argentina: National Bank 
Holidays, 2001 
Argentina 2001 Broad-Based Heaphy (2025) 
Cyprus: National Bank  
Holiday, 2013 
Cyprus 2013 Broad-Based Schaefer-Brown (2025a) 
Ecuador: National Bank  
Holiday, 1999 
Ecuador 1999 Broad-Based Decker (2025) 
Greece: National Bank  
Holiday, 2015 
Greece 2015 Broad-Based Schaefer-Brown (2025b) 
India: Yes Bank  
Moratorium, 2020 
India–Yes Bank 2020 Ad Hoc Gupta (2025) 
United States: National Bank 
Holiday, 1933 
US 1933 Broad-Based George (2025) 
United States: Rhode Island 
Limited Bank Holiday, 1991 
US–Rhode Island 1991 Broad-Based, Limited George and Alden (2025) 
Fund Suspensions 
Argentina: Mutual Fund 
Suspensions, 2019 
Argentina–Funds 2019 Broad-Based, 
Voluntary 
Heaphy and Makhija 
(2025) 
United States: Reserve Primary 
Fund Suspension, 2008 
US–Reserve Fund 
2008 
Ad Hoc, Voluntary Makhija (2025) 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
In US–Reserve Fund 2008, the fund “broke the buck” (meaning its net asset value, or NAV, 
fell below 99.5 cents per share) after sustaining losses when the investment bank Lehman 
Brothers failed. In response, the fund’s managers delayed processing redemption requests 
and rejected new redemptions (Gardephe 2010). It then liquidated without reopening. In 
Argentina–Funds 2019, several funds suspended redemptions when they were unable to 
implement government debt restructuring that applied to institutional, but no t individual, 
investors. The fund association worked with the regulator to swiftly craft a solution that 
enabled most of the funds to lift their suspensions within two weeks.  
A Note about Deposit Insurance  
Although the facts of our cases do not exactly illustrate this point —none of our cases 
involved banks that had credible deposit insurance  in place ex ante —an extensive body of 
literature has established that credible preexisting deposit insurance can help prevent bank 
runs and thus the need for bank holidays. Introducing or expanding insurance during a crisis 
 
‘piggy bank’ or ‘ATM’ effect, that a more liquid fund might be subject to substantial redemption requests, 
because it has better liquidity terms. (Lestz 2011) 
 
5
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 8 ---
can also make bank holidays more effective . For these reasons, most developed economies 
now mandate that banks carry deposit insurance . During crises, countries have often been 
able to avoid bank holidays by introducing a new deposit insurance scheme or expanding an 
existing one. An earlier New Bagehot survey of account guarantees describes such programs 
(for more information, see McNamara, Kulam, et al. [2022]).  
Six of our seven bank cases involved a preexisting deposit insurance scheme. In five of those 
cases—Argentina 2001, Ecuador 1999, Cyprus 2013, Greece 2015, and US–Rhode Island 
1991—that scheme was not perceived as credible , and runs persist ed, resulting in the 
governments’ declaring a bank holiday . In US–Rhode Island 1991, the failure of the state -
chartered, privately operated deposit insurance scheme led the state to declare a bank 
holiday regarding 45 affected banks and credit unions; they were legally pro hibited from 
operating without deposit insurance. The state allowed institutions to reopen only once they 
qualified for federal insurance. Banks that failed to meet federal standards did not reopen.  
In India–Yes Bank 2020, the government increased deposit insurance by 400% in the weeks 
before the central bank imposed a moratorium on Yes Bank and took it into administration. 
Thanks in part to that preemptive measure, runs on other banks were minimal.  
In contrast, in the US 1933  case, universal deposit insurance was not in place when the 
national bank holiday was imposed. However, as part of its response to widespread bank 
failures, the government de facto guaranteed deposits of all banks that reopened. The 
reopening succeeded: depositor confiden ce returned, and funds flowed back into bank s. 
Within months , Congress created the F ederal Deposit Insurance Corporation (F DIC), 
granting it both insurance and resolution powers.10 This institutional framework stabilized 
the system and virtually eliminated deposit  runs. The US government has not declared a 
bank holiday since the 1930s.  
Deposit insurance is typically capped so it covers only retail or small business deposit 
accounts at banks. Larger deposits and runnable liabilities at nonbanks are not covered and 
could pose systemic risks. For example, nondeposit investors ran on US mutual funds during 
the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–09 (GFC) (see US–Reserve Fund 2008) , and uninsured 
bank depositors ran on regional US banks in March 2023. In both cases, the US government 
guaranteed investors or depositors (Fed 2023).  
Given the strong preventive effect of such programs, policymakers should establish and fund 
deposit insurance  at credible levels with adequate terms before a crisis , and t hey should 
effectively communicate such programs and their limits  to the public . Overpromising , as 
occurred with a loan guarantee in Ecuador 1999,  may cause the public to question whether 
the gov ernment can make good on its commitment or force the government to renege , 
voiding the mitigating effect.  
 
10 The FDIC was established in 1933 with coverage up to USD 2,500 per account. Congress has raised the 
threshold over time including an increase during the Global Financial Crisis from USD 100,000 to USD 250,000, 
where it now stands.  
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 9 ---
A Note about Emerging-Market Economies  
Four of our banking cases involve d emerging-market economies (EMEs) (Argentina 2001, 
Cyprus 2013, Ecuador 1999, and Greece 2015). They faced heightened challenges stemming 
from the balance-of-payment, sovereign debt, and external funding issues  that triggered 
their bank holidays. Some countries established capital controls to address their currency 
issues. 
EMEs also may lack credible deposit insurance or effective bank supervision and resolution 
frameworks. In some cases, d issonance among governmental agencies (Ecuador 1999 and 
Cyprus 2013) or lack of judicial validation (Argentina 2001 and Ecuador 1999 ) can 
undermine the authorities’ credibility and disrupt their bank holiday strategies, fueling 
further runs. While governments may face resource constraints for many reasons, we 
recommend that they work to establish credible deposit insurance, strengthen bank 
regulatory and resolution infrastructure and improve interagency coordination before a 
banking crisis so that a bank holiday may be avoided or outcomes may be improved. 
Figure 2 summarizes key finding s and recommendations from the cases surveyed. For a 
more comprehensive discussion, see the Conclusion. 
Figure 2: Summary of Key Findings and Recommendations 
Recommendation  Findings 
Buy Time  A bank holiday is a high-risk tool that can be an effective “measure of last 
resort” in extreme situations to buy time to enable a comprehensive remedy. 
Apply a Coordinated and 
Comprehensive Remedy 
The primary benefit of a holiday is that it allows for the implementation of a 
coordinated response to the underlying distress. 
Reopen Only Viable Banks Authorities should take steps to reopen only banks that are viable —potentially 
by injecting new capital—so that runs do not restart. 
Manage Withdrawal 
Restrictions 
If authorities cannot expeditiously apply corrective actions to resolve the 
underlying distress, reopening the banks with withdrawal restrictions enables 
control of banking activity until a full resolution can be achieved. 
Strengthen the Banking 
System Ex Ante 
Policymakers should take steps in advance to create stable banks and 
regulatory infrastructure, mitigate runs, and avoid the need for a bank holiday. 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
We discuss 12 Key Design Decisions that are critical in understanding and evaluating bank 
holidays and fund suspensions. 
  
7
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 10 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: What was the purpose of the bank holiday or fund suspension or gate? 
In our cases, one holiday was initiated for a single distressed bank (India–Yes Bank 2020), 
two were imposed because of weaknesses in many banks (Ecuador 1999, US 1933,), and four 
were the result of shocks to the entire banking system (Argentina 2001, Cyprus 2013, Greece 
2015, and US–Rhode Island 1991). Although the distresses that led to bank holidays varied, 
in each case, the purpose of the holiday was to stop the runs or forestall expected runs and 
create a pause that allowed authorities to design a solution to the underlying problem and 
stabilize the system.  
In India–Yes Bank 2020, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Ministry of Finance imposed a 
30-day moratorium on Yes Bank, the fourth -largest private bank in the country, after the 
bank experienced runs following reports about liquidity  problems, nonperforming assets, 
and a scandal involving its founder. The moratorium permitted the authorities to formulate 
a resolution plan for Yes Bank to protect its depositors, forestalled further deter ioration to 
the bank, and prevented contagion in the banking system.  
In Ecuador 1999, the government imposed a broad bank holiday, over the objections of the 
governor and board of the Central Bank of Ecuador (CBE), after its closure of a medium-sized 
institution triggered widespread runs. The governor and board of the CBE resigned en masse 
in protest; they had recommended that the government just close several nonviable banks 
that had been experiencing runs. Unfortunately, despite adopting the US dollar as Ecuador’s 
official currency in early 2000 to stabilize the system and prevent hyperinflation, the country 
was not able to restore confidence in the system  and could reopen the banks only by 
imposing withdrawal restrictions of various types.  
In US 1933, the government imposed a federal holiday only after most states had already 
imposed banking holidays or withdrawal restrictions  during the preceding months . The 
uncoordinated local actions had sparked regional runs as depositors withdrew funds from 
nearby banks fearing they too might close. By the time of President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s 
inauguration in March 1933, the nation suffered from a general lack of confidence in the 
banking system. As one of his first acts as president, Roosevelt issued an executive order “to 
place all banks on a uniform basis of restricted operations and to permit the development of 
adequate means of dealing with the national emergency” (US Government 1933, 1). Congress 
acted quickly to provide  the tools necessary, and the US T reasury coordinated with the 
Federal Reserve and state authorities to orchestrate a quick, successful reopening of “sound” 
banks. Of the  17,000 commercial banks operating in the United States before the holiday, 
roughly 12,000 were successfully reopened and survived.  
In three of our other cases (Argentina 2001, Cyrus 2013, and Greece 2015), the bank holiday 
was a response to an exogeneous event that sparked runs  or crippled much of the banking 
sector. In these cases, the government had little choice but to impose a bank holiday to give 
policymakers time to design a collective remedy that might not only stabilize the banking 
sector but also solve the broader issue.  
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 11 ---
In Argentina 2001, the government defaulted on its external debt. The bank holiday, and  
later long-lasting withdrawal restrictions and capital controls, enabled the government to 
avoid a flight of dollars out of the country and manage the banking system  in the midst of  
sovereign debt issues and significant political and civil upheaval. Similarly, in Cyprus 2013 
and Greece 2015, the authorities imposed broad-based bank holidays to safeguard the 
financial system when banks ’ access to funding was severely limited  and had to be 
renegotiated. The banks were reopened following successful renegotiations.  
In US–Rhode Island 1991, 45 financial institutions were stripped of their legally required 
deposit insurance when the collapse of two institutions in quick succession bankrupted the 
state’s private deposit insurance fund  (Rhode Island Share and Deposit Indemnity 
Corporation, or RISDIC). The governor’s declaration of the bank holiday closed and “ring-
fenced” the affected institutions, mitigating possible contagion to viable banks unaffected by 
RISDIC’s failure, and enabled the state to coordinate rehabilitative measures.  
Mutual Funds  
In our two fund cases, the funds voluntarily initiated suspensions to protect fund assets. In 
US–Reserve Fund 2008 , the Reserve Primary Fund asked the Securities and Exchange 
Commission ( SEC) for permission to delay paying redemptions and to close the fund to 
additional redemption requests when it could not raise sufficient liquidity in the  turmoil 
following Lehman Brothers ’ bankruptcy. Of note, the fund administrator  delayed seeking 
SEC permission to impose a suspension, employing methods that the regulator questioned 
before doing so.11  
In Argentina –Funds 2019, the government ’s statute freezing certain government bonds 
owned by institutions but not individuals created uncertainty about how funds were to 
differentiate between underlying investor classes holding the same bonds. Several impacted 
funds voluntarily suspended redemptions and engaged their industry association to work 
with their regulator  (Comisión Na cional de Valores , or CNV)  to design an acceptable 
accounting method so that the funds could address redemptions involving the affected 
bonds. A solution was reached quickly, and the funds lifted their suspensions. Fitch Ratings, 
a credit rating agency,  noted that the mutual fund industry had no option but to gate 
redemptions while it adjusted its operational capabilities to comply with the new regulations 
(Fitch Ratings 2019).  
 
11 The US SEC’s attempt to address the stigma of gating  or suspensions f ollowing the US –Reserve Fund 2008 
case proved unsuccessful but is in structive. The commission adopted new fund rules that permitted funds to 
voluntarily adopt a “redemption gate” (suspend redemptions) if their weekly liquidity ratio fell below 30% to 
provide the fund a “cooling off ” period to address the effects of a short -term investor panic and preserve 
liquidity (SEC 2022). However, in March 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, administrators of mutual funds 
experiencing significant redemptions refused to utilize the gates and instead actively managed their assets to 
avoid reaching the threshold, which led to disturbances in the short -term funding markets. In addition, 
redemptions increased as the fund s approached the threshold , resulting in an exacerbation effect.  In March 
2023, the SEC amended the regulation to remove th e ability to impose a redemption gate based on a liquidity 
ratio (SEC 2023).  
 
9
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 12 ---
2. Part of a Package : Was any public or private assistance provided to the bank or 
fund to address the problem? Did the government implement any other actions to 
address the problem?  
Because a bank holiday does not address root problems, the success of reopening depends 
on the steps authorities take to address underlying problems. In all of our cases, authorities 
used additional tools during the holiday (a) to rectify the root causes of distress and prevent 
further runs when banks reopened or (b) to manage withdrawals if the problems remained. 
In this survey, we use the term “corrective actions” to encompass both types of interventions. 
The most common corrective actions were liquidity  provision; deposit insurance or 
guarantees; capital inj ections; resolution or restructuring; and withdrawal restrictions, 
account freezes, or capital controls (see Figure 3). 
The specific actions taken depended on three main factors: (a) what the law allowed; (b) how 
much funding was available ; and (c) other factors such as currency issues, economic 
instability, and political unrest. Often , authorities applied more than one corrective action 
concurrently or consecutively.  
Figure 3: Corrective Actions Taken  
Short-form 
Case Name 
Liquidity/ 
Lender of 
Last 
Resort 
Deposit Insurance or 
Guarantee 
Withdrawal 
Restrictions 
Capital 
Injections 
and Source 
Verification 
of Solvency 
Resolution or 
Restructuring  
Currency 
Devaluation  
Foreign 
Currency 
Restrictions 
Capital 
Controls 
 
Change? 
Bank Holidays 
Argentina 
2001 
✓ ✓ No change ✓ Government 
 
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Cyprus 2013 ✓ ✓ No change ✓ None 
 
✓ 
  
✓ 
Ecuador 
1999 
✓ ✓ Temporarily 
increased 
✓ Government ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Greece 2015 ✓ ✓ No change ✓ None 
 
✓ 
  
✓ 
India–Yes 
Bank 2020 
✓ ✓ Increased 
prior (no 
direct link) 
✓ Government, 
private 
 
✓ 
   
US 1933 ✓ Implied 
guarantee 
Adopted 
after 
 
Government ✓ ✓ 
   
US–Rhode 
Island 1991 
 
✓ Yes ✓ Government ✓ ✓ 
   
Fund Suspensions 
Argentina–
Funds 2019 
✓ Not 
applicable 
Not 
applicable 
✓ None 
     
US–Reserve 
Fund 2008 
 
Not 
applicable 
Not 
applicable 
✓ None 
 
✓ 
   
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Although not decisive, the level of coordination among government agencies can affect the 
success of corrective actions and thus the outcome of the bank holiday. When governmental 
units cooperate, even extraordinary actions can be quickly implemented and supported , as 
seen in the US 1933 case. In contrast, Argentina 2001, Cyprus 2013, and Ecuador 1999 show 
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 13 ---
how conflict among central bank s, executives, legislature s, and courts  can delay action, 
undermine policy effectiveness, and signal confusion and instability to depositors and the 
broader public. Next, we discuss the major types of corrective actions used in the cases we 
surveyed. 
Provision of Liquidity  
In six of our bank cases (all but US—Rhode Island 1991), the central bank provided enhanced 
lending to banks before  the holiday, upon reopening, or both . Specific liquidity provisions 
varied across our cases and were generally based on the fiscal resources available to a given 
country. India–Yes Bank 2020  illustrates the need for liquidity , as upon Yes Bank ’s 
reopening, the RBI provided the bank with an emergency liquidity line of credit of 600 billion 
Indian rupees (INR), of which it borrowed INR 500 billion and repaid the full amount within 
six months.  
Countries with sufficient fiscal depth may be able to raise the needed funds quickly. In US 
1933, Congress passed the Emergency Banking Act (EBA) during the holiday to temporarily 
suspend the gold standard. President Roosevelt advised the Federal Reserve to issue 
currency liberally to banks that were cleared to reopen and informed the Fed that the 
government would protect  it from losses. Congress also authorized another agency, the 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) , to provide secured loans to any bank, with the 
approval of the treasury secretary and president. The EBA also authorized the Fed to  both 
lend to nonfinancial entities (against government securities as collateral) and issue Federal 
Reserve bank notes as emergency currency (which were liabilit ies of the Fed rather than 
new reserves and therefore noninflationary ). Use of t hese tools was limited thanks to the 
success of the reopening , but they may have helped boost public confidence. They also 
illustrate that the effects of a bank holiday extend beyond the banking system itself. Rather 
than rely solely on banks to resume lending, the government and central bank created direct 
credit facilities to support and stabilize the economy. 
Emerging-market economies can face tougher constraints because of limited fiscal capacity 
and currency vulnerabilities; these constraints may require more drastic or restrictive 
measures. In Ecuador 1999, even before the government adopted the US dollar as its official 
currency in early 2000 to stabilize the system and prevent hyperinflation , the central bank 
had limited capacity to provide meaningful liquidity support. As a result, the government 
imposed withdrawal restrictions and capital controls when banks reopened.  
Like Ecuador, Argentina ’s ability in 2001 to provide liquidity to its ban ks before and after 
two bank holidays was complicated by a currency crisis. Market concerns that the central 
bank would be unable to maintain the one-to-one peg of the Argentine peso to the US dollar 
triggered significant deposit outflows, as more than two -thirds of Argentine bank deposits 
were denominated in dollars. As further withdrawal restrictions failed to stop the runs, the 
government issued a decree requiring banks to convert their assets and liabilities from US 
dollars to Argentine pesos at an asym metric rate. With dollars in short supply, t he 
government then offered advances in Argentine pesos to financial institutions to help them 
meet depositor demands; the financial institutions then agreed to purchase new government 
11
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 14 ---
bonds later. Argentina also received emergency liquidity support from the World Bank and 
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB). 
The banking crises in Cyprus 2013 and Greece 2015 were precipitated by a broad-based loss 
of access to external funding. Greece’s international development package was thrown into 
question after a European Central Bank (ECB) decision to no longer accept Greek sovereign 
bonds as collateral  made it difficult for Greek banks to borrow from the ECB ’s standing 
lending facilities, their major funding source. The ECB’s decision also affected Cypriot banks, 
which held significant amounts  of these securities . Both countries had to renegotiate their 
external financing packages with the ECB, European Union (EU), and International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) to be able to provide liquidity to reopen their banks (and in some cases, provide 
capital).12 
For mutual funds, preexisting  lender-of-last-resort authority , guarantees, or other 
government insurance do not exist; funds are expected to rely on credit arrangements with 
banks or support commitments from their sponsoring organizations. However, in a crisis, 
governments will sometimes create temporary liquidity facilities to support the mutual fund 
industry, as occurred in our two cases involving mutual fund suspensions.  
In 2008, news that the Reserve Primary Fund “broke the buck ” rapidly led to widespread 
contagion and runs throughout the money market mutual fund ( MMMF) industry and 
further disrupted the short–term funding m arket. The Federal Reserve rushed to provide 
lending programs 13 to enable the  funds to meet redemption requests. The US Treasury 
Department also took the unusual step of enacting a temporary guarantee program for 
money market funds that was used by roughly 1,500 individual funds (none of which were 
forced into liquidation) . However, the Reserve Primary Fund was ineligible as its NAV had 
dropped below the qualifying threshold. 
In Argentina 2019, on the same day as the coordinated industry -wide suspension of 
redemption rights was announced, the central bank ( Banco Central de la República 
Argentina, or BCRA) launched two new facilities to provide liquidity to the mutual fund 
industry through which the BCRA would accept from mutual funds the four types of public 
debt securities affected by the government’s debt reprofiling. 
 
12 The Greek central bank had to resort to the emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) mechanism, a type of short-
term loan that carries a higher rate and is subject to regular review and approval by the ECB. ELA reached EUR 
88.3 billion by the end  of July 2015 (69% of total Eurosystem funding during this period), when the 22 -day 
holiday was lifted after the negotiation of a new aid package. 
13 The Fed set up two lending programs for MMMFs during the Reserve Primary Fund’s failure during the GFC: 
Four days before the fund suspended redemptions, the Fed launched the Asset -Backed Commercial Paper 
Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF), which loaned USD 150 billion to banks to purchase asset-
backed commercial paper from MMMFs in its first two weeks of operation before usage waned as markets 
improved. The following month, the Fed also announced the Money Market Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF), 
which could loan up to USD 540 billion to special purpose vehicles to purchase certificates of deposit, bank 
notes, and commercial paper from eligible money market investors . 
 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 15 ---
Deposit Insurance and Guarantees  
Six of our seven bank cases involved a preexisting deposit insurance scheme; US 1933 was 
the exception, although Congress adopted coverage within months after banks reopened. In 
US–Rhode Island 199 1, the collapse of the state -chartered private deposit insurance fund 
prompted the governor to close 45 credit unions and banks that could not lawfully operate 
without insurance. Institutions that qualified for federal insurance began to reopen on a 
case-by-case basis in less than a month without sparking further runs. Those that could not 
qualify for federal insurance were resolved.  
In times of crisis, governments may increase deposit insurance to signal security of accounts. 
Although our research did not reveal a direct connection  to Yes Bank , India’s Parliament 
raised the limit on deposit insurance from INR 100,000 to INR 500,000 in the weeks before 
the RBI imposed a moratorium on Yes Bank and took it into administration.  Then–RBI 
Governor Shaktikanta Das evaluated the moratorium as “nondisruptive” to the broader 
banking system, suggesting runs on other banks were prevented (Das 2020). Parliament 
later made the increased level of insurance permanent.  
However, deposit insurance may not be effective to stop runs if it is not perceived as credible, 
and in any event,  it will not cover amounts over the insured limits. The same is true of 
guarantees. In Cyprus 2013, although Cypriot accounts were covered by a deposit insurance 
scheme (up to the required EUR 100,000 insurance limit) , runs were precipitated by the 
public’s perception that the funding of the insurance was insufficient and haircuts on both 
insured and uninsured depositors were possible . Similarly, in Ecuador 1999, although the 
government increased the  deposit insurance coverage and guaranteed  loans, bank runs 
continued, leading the  government to declare a one-week bank holiday. When the banks 
reopened, the government was unable to provide liquidity support to the banks or fund the 
government’s deposit insurance agency. A second run ensued, and the insurance agency—
which accumulated a liability of USD 850 million wi thin four months after the end of the 
holiday—announced that it would lower coverage of deposits from the enhanced level. Only 
after the government imposed extensive withdrawal restrictions did the runs stop.  
Recapitalization, Restructuring, and Liquidation of Banks 
Governments face a conundrum in determining whether to close weak banks, since closures 
can pose the risk of contagion. As illustrated in Ecuador 1999, timing can be crucial: the IMF 
opined that the policy decision not to resolve the failing Banco del Progreso had “backfired” 
(IMF 2000). The central bank had recommended that the government resolve the bank and 
tighten fiscal policies earlier, rather than initiate the broad-based bank holiday, which was 
followed by an extended peri od of withdrawal restrictions and freezes . During this period, 
the government recapitalized the banks using government bonds, which the banks could use 
once they reopened14 (Jácome H. 2004).  
 
14 The government also required banks to place 1% of their deposit base into the liquidity su pport fund 
established with the USD 70 million loan from the Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean , 
13
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 16 ---
Once a bank holiday is imposed, authorities must consider whether to reopen some or all of 
the banks. In all of our bank cases except Argentina 2001 and Greece 2015, the authorities 
made a distinction between viable banks that they permitted to reopen immediately and 
those they did not. In three of these cases (Ecuador 1999, India –Yes Bank 2020, and US 
1933), authorities organized the recapitalization of weak banks from public and private 
sources before reopening them; publication of these efforts generally helped to strengthen 
credibility. In India–Yes Bank 2020, the bank was cleared to reopen quicker than expected  
following the use of creative structuring, including a capital injection of INR 100 billion from 
a consortium of eight public and private Indian banks. New and existing investors with more 
than 100 shares were required to maintain 75% of their shareholding for three years from 
the date of the restructuring p lan, providing long -term stability. To incentivize new 
investment, the government waived the capital gains tax for the investors . Rating agencies 
upgraded the bank in the second half of 2020, and deposits rebounded to pre-crisis levels in 
2023. 
Greece, which had closed a number of troubled banks in the years leading up to the bank 
holiday, permitted all its banks to reopen without a n explicit viability assessment. In 
Argentina 2001, the government established a broad -based capital injection program 
(beginning in 2002, after the country ’s second bank holiday and while withdrawal 
restrictions were still in place) to compensate financial institutions for imbalances in their 
balance sheets resulting fro m asymmetric pesoization and to fund the dismantling of 
restrictions on term deposits . However, delays in defining the role of the administering 
agency delayed the capitalization  (see Key Design Decision No. 7 , Details of Holidays, 
Suspensions, or Gates).  
In all cases where an explicit assessment of viability was undertaken, nonviable banks were 
either restructured then reopened or liquidated.  In US–Rhode Island 1991, the 19 
institutions that could not qualify for federal deposit insurance, which would have required 
a determination of solvency, either reopened through mergers or were liquidated. In Cyprus 
2013, the sovereign needed to negotiate financing from the IMF, EU, and ECB to stabilize its 
banking system. These negotiations resulted in the resolution of the second-largest Cypriot 
bank, which involved transferring its insured deposits to the largest bank and liquidating the 
remaining bad bank.  The largest bank was  recapitalized by bailing in  its uninsured 
depositors. In US 1933, following the general reopening of viable banks, the Treasury 
worked with federal and state authorities to inject capital into banks needing capital so that 
they could reopen. Banks found to be nonviable were liquidated. Just weeks after the general 
reopening, roughly 5,000 of the 17,000 banks that had been operating  before the crisis had 
been permanently closed and liquidated  (see Key Design Decision No. 9, Verification of 
Solvency; Rhee, Hoffner, et. al. [2024]; Rhee, Oguri, et al. [2022]; and McNamara, Mott, et al. 
[2024]).  
 
which functioned as a supplemental reserve requirement on top of the conventional 8% reserve requirement  
(Jácome H. 2004). 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 17 ---
Withdrawal Restrictions, Account Freezes, and Capital Controls  
In four of our cases, governments chose to reopen banks even though the underlying distress 
had not been resolved. When the banks reopened, the authorities imposed withdrawal 
restrictions, account freezes, or capital controls to slow and manage withdrawals, avoid 
recurring runs, and buy time to design further solutions  (see Key Design Decision s No. 7, 
Details of Holidays, Suspensions, or Gates, and No. 8, Treatment of Depositors or Investors). 
In Argentina 2001  and Ecuador 1999, governments facing currency crises established 
separate limitations on foreign currency accounts to help them manage foreign reserves . 
Cyprus 2013 and Greece 2015 each involved a system -wide liquidity crunch that required 
the government to renegotiate external financing; banks were reopened before these deals 
were finalized.  
While withdrawal restrictions may be unavoidable, they seriously undermine confidence in 
the banking system  as they violate depositors’ expectations of  access and can precipitate 
new run s up to the maximum permitted withdrawals. This is what happened in Ecuador 
1999; as the government unfroze demand and savings accounts from April to December , 
runs reignited across about one -third of the banking system.  Furthermore, fear that such 
measures, or worse, may be imposed after a holiday may spur depositors to run ex ante: For 
instance, in Argentina 2001, withdrawal restrictions and concern that the government would 
expropriate funds (as it had done during a 1989 crisis) helped fuel preemptive runs before 
the bank holiday was imposed . Withdrawal restrictions also often face strong political 
backlash and sti r public unrest . In both Argentina 2001  and Ecuador 1999 , rioting and 
disagreements about crisis management led to the resignation of several high-level officials 
across various agencies. 
3. Legal Authority: What laws authorized the bank holiday, fund suspension, and any 
additional corrective actions? 
All the countries in our banking cases relied on existing law s to impose the bank holiday s. 
Those laws were  either (a) included in a specific banking law or (b) authorized by a more 
general law providing for  interventions during  national emergencies. In Cyprus 2013, 
Ecuador 1999 , India –Yes Bank 2020, and US –Rhode Island 1991, authorities relied on 
existing banking laws. In Argentina 2001 and Greece 2015, bank holiday s were based on 
provisions concerning national emergencies. In US 1933, President Roosevelt relied on the 
Trading with the Enemy Act of 1917 —a World War I statute that granted the president the 
power to prevent the offshoring of the nation ’s gold and to uniformly prohibit or exercise 
greater control over transactions at all US banks during times of war. That legal basis was 
controversial, but Congress later retroactively ratified the holiday (Awalt 1969). 
In six of our seven cases ( excluding India–Yes Bank 2020) , the executive issued additional 
decrees or the legislature passed laws to authorize the corrective actions needed to address 
the underlying distresses that made the bank holiday necessary. In India–Yes Bank 2020, the 
moratorium authority was available ex ante in the existing bank regulation framework . 
However, India’s Central Board of Direct Taxes had to amend rules in the Finance Act 2019 
15
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 18 ---
to allow the Ministry of Finance to exempt investors who injected new capital into Yes Bank 
from capital gains taxes on their profits. 
Figure 4 shows the acting authorities and legal bases relied on for instituting bank holidays 
and corrective actions , which may face legal challenges. In Argentina 2001 and Ecuador 
1999, judges ruled that measures imposing losses on depositors that resulted from currency 
conversions and certain withdrawal restrictions were unconstitutional. In Argentina 2001, 
in nearly 20 0,000 cases, courts granted injunctive relief restoring to depositors  the full 
amounts of their accounts and allowing them to continue making large withdrawals . In 
response, t he Argentine president i mposed the country’s second bank holiday during the 
crisis, providing that the holiday would end once Congress approved legisl ation that would 
delay execution of the injunctions. Ultimately, Congress passed legislation that did so, 
permitting depositors to access their funds only once all steps of the judicial process had 
been concluded (see Key Design Decision No. 8, Treatment of Depositors or Investors).  
Figure 4: Legal Authorities for Bank Holidays and Corrective Actions 
Short-form Case 
Name 
Bank Holiday New Legal Authority for 
Corrective Actions Acting Party Authorizing Law 
Argentina 2001 President with endorsement of 
the Cabinet of Ministers 
Constitution President issued decrees 
freezing deposits; Congress 
passed new law altering 
injunction procedures 
Cyprus 2013 Central bank Cyprus Bank Holidays Law 
of 1959; Central Bank of 
Cyprus Law of 2002 
Parliament passed new law 
for capital controls; 
authorities reached a new 
agreement with the ECB, EU, 
and IMF. 
Ecuador 1999 Superintendency of Banks 
(executive branch) 
Constitution  President issued decrees 
freezing deposits 
Greece 2015 President, following proposal 
from the Cabinet of Ministers 
and ratification by Parliament 
Constitution Greek authorities agreed to 
new economic adjustment 
program 
India–Yes Bank 2020 Ministry of Finance with 
recommendation from central 
bank 
Banking Regulation Act of 
1949 
Ministry of Finance amended 
tax code 
US 1933 President Trading with the Enemy Act 
of 1917 
Congress passed new laws 
giving executive power over 
banking system and 
suspending gold standard 
US–Rhode Island 
1991 
Governor Rhode Island General Laws 
(on financial institutions) 
General Assembly and 
governor created the 
Depositors’ Economic 
Protection Corporation 
(DEPCO) for restructuring 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 19 ---
Mutual Funds 
The funds and their regulators in our cases relied on existing laws. In US–Reserve Fund 2008, 
the Securities and Exchange Commission , following a well -defined regulatory regime, 
retroactively approved the fund ’s request to delay redemption payments . The Federal 
Reserve and Treasury also relied on their existing emergency authorities when they created 
liquidity programs to support money funds following Reserve Fund’s failure.  
In Argentina–Funds 2019, after the government extended  the maturities on  certain short-
term sovereign debt instruments held by institutions but not individuals, funds experiencing 
heightened redemption requests did not have a legally sufficient mechanism with which to 
effectively respond to the new law and calculate redemptions. Numerous funds voluntarily 
suspended redemptions,  and the mutual fund association worked with the government 
regulator (CNV) to, within days, adopt a solution that provided a mechanism for the funds to 
treat identical securities differently based on type of investor.  
4. Administration: Who administered the bank holiday and  corrective actions or 
fund suspension? 
In our seven bank cases, the governing body that implemented the bank holiday—the central 
bank (Cyprus 2013 and India –Yes Bank 2020)  or the executive (Argentina 2001, Ecuador 
1999, Greece 2015, US –Rhode Island 1991, and US 1933) —also administered the 
operational details of the bank holiday, reopening, and corrective actions  (see Key Design 
Decision No. 5, Governance) . Administrative decisions included: determining the length of 
the holiday, extensions, and conditions of reopening, which banks could reopen, availability 
of liquidity, type and duration of withdrawal restrictions , account freezes, capital controls, 
and any exceptions. In US 1933, most banks were state  chartered, which required the 
Treasury department to harmonize processes and standards with the 48 state authorities to 
ensure a coordinated remediation effort. 
In all of our banking cases, the restructuring and resolution function for nonviable banks was 
delegated to a  specialized agency. In three cases (Argentina 2001, Ecuador 1999, and US–
Rhode Island 1991), the government created a new agency for that purpose. In Ecuador 1999 
and Argentina  2001, the effectiveness of the new entities, the Deposit Guarantee Agency 
(Agencia de Garantía de Depósitos, or AGD ) and Financial System Restructuring Unit, 
respectively, suffered owing to a lack of funding and operational difficulties. 
In India–Yes Bank 2020 , the moratorium was part of the RBI’s prescribed bank resolution 
process. Moratorium status is similar to receivership in the United States, in that the bank 
may not, except as specified in the government ’s Order of Moratorium, “make any payment 
to any deposito rs or discharge any liabilities or obligations to any other creditors ” (MoF 
2020). The bank is protected from claims and governed by an administrator to protect its 
assets. Similarly, in Cyprus 2013, the central bank acted as administrator for Laiki Bank and 
Bank of Cyprus, liquidating the former and restructuring the latter.  
17
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 20 ---
Mutual Funds 
The two funds i n our cases  administered their suspensions and associated actions under 
regulatory oversight. In Argentina, individual funds reopened using the government-
designed solution or any other approved method that all owed them to differentiate 
individual from institutional investors . Similarly, the Reserve Primary Fund managed the 
payment of redemptions on the delayed basis that the SEC had approved. However, after the 
fund’s board later voted to liquidate the fund, it was compelled to manage the liquidation of 
its assets according to a n SEC-proposed and court-approved plan, which gave greater  
protection for investors relative to the fund’s initial plan. 
5. Governance: Who authorized the bank holiday or fund suspension and any 
corrective actions? 
In all our bank cases, the imposition of the holiday was undertaken by either the central bank 
(Cyprus 2013 and India –Yes Bank 2020) or the executive (Argentina 2001, Ecuador 1999, 
Greece 2015, US–Rhode Island 1991, and US 1933). 15 Typically, the executive or legislature 
delegated authority over the management and terms of the holiday to the country’s treasury 
or finance ministry. In the two mutual fund cases, the suspensions were  initiated by each 
fund and was subject to review by the  regulatory authority  that also oversaw the funds ’ 
implementing activities.  
6. Communication and Disclosure: How were the bank holidays, fund suspensions or 
gates, and corrective actions communicated?  
Bank holidays pose significant communication challenges. Effective communications can 
support policy efforts to manage a bank holiday, while poor communication may undermine 
these efforts and damage the government ’s credibility . The longer the bank holiday or 
restrictions persist, the greater the communications challenges will be , especially if the 
government’s strategy involves complex, long-term corrective actions, as in Argentina 2001 
and Ecuador 1999.  Authorities must communicate in a timely, accurate, consistent, and 
credible manner (Unsal and Garbers 2021) . In our cases, authorities said the holiday and 
withdrawal restrictions were necessary to stabilize the banking system (Cyprus 201 3, 
Greece 2015, and US  1933) or broader economy (Argentina 2001, Ecuador  1999).16 In US 
1933, President Roosevelt also stressed the need for a comprehensive nationwide solution  
 
15 In Argentina 2001 and Greece 2015, the president acted upon the proposal or endorsement of the Cabinet of 
Ministers; and in Ecuador 1999, the president gained control over the banks by declaring a national emergency 
after the Superintendency of Banks, also part of the executive branch, had declared the holiday. 
16 For example, in Argentina 2001, the minister of economy stated, “Everything that we do will be to protect 
the savings of Argentines, to preserve convertibility, to preserve the one -to-one rate so that the economy c an 
function well” in a televised press conference (Lyons, Plumb, and Helen 2001) . Similarly, in Cyprus 2013, the 
government’s announcement said the bank holiday was “to safeguard the stability of the Cypriot banking 
system” (CBC 2013). 
  
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 21 ---
to replace the patchwork of ad hoc state and local bank holidays and withdrawal restrictions 
(Roosevelt 1934).  
Of course, t he effectiveness of any communication strategy depends on the strength or 
weaknesses of the unde rlying policies. A ppropriate disclosure of information and details 
about the authorities’ actions can influence depositor behavior, enhance the central bank or 
government’s credibility, and help contain contagion (Duvvuri 2011) . In cases where the 
bank holiday proved most successful—allowing banks to reopen quickly without withdrawal 
restrictions or renewed runs—the authorities seem ed to appl y appropriate corrective 
actions and communicated details effectively. This approach included credible and timely 
disclosures about the closures, corrective actions, and the overall viability of the system 
(India–Yes Bank 2020, US 1933, and US–Rhode Island 1991).  
While some miscommunications may have occurred in these cases , the overall 
communication strategies appear to have contributed positively to the outcomes. These 
cases also featured statements emphasizing the need to protect depositors or shareholders, 
which seemed to generate confidence in the government ’s actions. In contrast, when such 
assurances lacked credibility, they appeared to undermine trust and exacerbate the crisis 
(Argentina 2001 and Ecuador 1999).  
Greece 2015 is unusual in that policymakers achieved a successful outcome from the bank 
holiday despite limited communications, p ossibly because the government ’s focus was on 
renegotiating its external financing.  
In US 1933, six days after he declared the bank holiday, President Roosevelt made the first 
“fireside chat” radio broadcast, in which he explained to the public in plain wording what the 
government had done to stabilize the banks  and when they would reopen . He asked the 
public to have faith and return deposits to banks that reopened . The public response was 
generally positive, as deposits rapidly re turned. The speech became iconic  and served a 
model for other authorities.  
Unclear (US –Rhode Island 199 1), incomplete, or noncredible ( Argentina 2001, Ecuador 
1999) communications can undermine a government’s efforts by failing to generate public 
cooperation or goodwill ; at extremes, they can stir civil unrest . In two of our cases, poor 
communications played a significant role in the runs that triggered the bank holidays. In 
Cyprus 201 3, the announcement by the president and Eurogroup of a new funding 
proposal—including a one -time tax on all insured and uninsured depositors , which the 
legislature later rejected —sparked widespread runs, which forced the government to 
declare a bank holiday. Similarly, in Argentina 2001, a month after restructuring its debt in 
a manner the IMF found “not consistent with fiscal reality, ” the government announced 
withdrawal restrictions  in an attempt to curb runs . These measures failed  to restore the 
public’s faith in the banking syste m, ultimately leading the government to impose a bank 
holiday (IMF 2004). IMF economists wrote that the Argentine authorities' "policy measures 
successively introduced during 2001 lacked direction and credibility and confirmed fears 
about [an] impending crisis” (IMF 2003, 6).  
19
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 22 ---
In Ecuador 1999, the president delivered the following message: “The government will never 
seize or confiscate anybody’s accounts. We have to protect our international money reserve. 
That reserve belongs to all Ecuadorians ” (BBC 1999). That message failed to reassure 
depositors, and a run ensued . Ecuador’s messaging about its deposit insurance and loan 
guarantee also suffered from a lack of credibility . T he public question ed whether the 
government could make good on its commitments or renege at the critical time, neutralizing 
the intended effect of these tools.  
Our cases also demonstrate that misinformation or confusion can be widespread when many 
authorities are involved in the remedy (US 1933), when the corrective actions have not yet 
been determined, or when the resolution is lengthy. In US–Rhode Island 1991, Rhode Island 
Governor Bruce Sundlun modeled his first address regarding the RISDIC crisis after 
President Roosevelt’s iconic 1933 speech; however, depositors faced uncertainty for weeks 
as the governor and legislators heatedly and publicly debated the amount and timing of 
payouts.  
Such communications challenges need not be fatal to the policy effort. Authorities should be 
diligent in managing coordination and accuracy and in finding ways to mitigate any negative 
effects. For example, in US  1933, public endorsements of the bank holiday by other 
administration officials, state leaders, and business executives were perceived positively and 
helped restore confidence. In US–Rhode Island 1991, while the final payout to depositors in 
closed banks took more than three years, a local newspaper played a key role in building 
trust. Its award-winning column called “Crisis Line ” facilitated a dialogue betwee n 
depositors and the government and kept depositors informed about the status of their 
accounts. We recommend that policymakers view communications as a strategic tool to 
support their bank holiday and corrective actions , familiarize themselves with good 
communication practices, and use them as proactively as possible.  
Mutual Funds 
The two mutual funds in our cases actively communicated with investors regarding gating, 
lifting of gates, valuation, and payment of redemptions. However, in US–Reserve Fund 2008, 
the SEC alleged that , among other things,  the fund’s administrator made fraudulent 
statements in its required disclosures regarding the fund’s NAV and the availability of credit 
support, and that it delayed making such disclosures in an attempt to stem redemptions. The 
SEC’s communications to the public emphasized its mission to protect investors.  
In Argentina–Funds 2019, the finance minister initially framed the debt rescheduling as a 
necessary step to address short-term liquidity pressures. The CNV moved quickly to clarify 
protections for retail mutual fund investors. However, the timing and coordination of these 
messages were uneven, with some investors learning of the changes only through emails or 
online account access. While the central bank improved transparency by publishing data and 
program details, the overall communication strategy lacked coherence and timeliness, 
undermining public and market confidence.  
20
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 23 ---
7. Details of Holidays, Suspensions, or Gates: What were the details of the bank 
holidays, suspensions or gates, and corrective actions? 
The duration of the bank holidays  (not including withdrawal restrictions)  in our cases 
ranged from six to 22 days. See  Figure 5 for the duration and characteristics of the bank 
holidays surveyed. 
Figure 5: Duration and Characteristics of the Bank Holidays 
Short-form Case Name 
Duration of Holiday  
(No. of  
calendar days) 
Permitted  
Broad-based 
Withdrawals 
Duration of Withdrawal 
Restrictions for 
Reopened Banks 
Term Deposits 
Extended 
Argentina 2001 6, 7* 
 
More than 1 year ✓ 
Cyprus 2013 10 ✓ Full year 
 
Ecuador 1999 7 
 
Full year ✓ 
Greece 2015 22 ✓ More than 1 year ✓ 
India–Yes Bank 2020 13 ✓ None  
US 1933 7; banks reopened in 
phases across the 
following 3 days 
 
Generally, none;  
some state variation 
 
US–Rhode Island 1991 6+; banks reopened 
as they qualified for 
deposit insurance 
 
None 
 
*Note: Argentina 2001 had two nonconsecutive holidays, the first spanning December 21 –26, 2001, and the 
second spanning April 19 –25, 2002. Withdrawal restrictions also preceded the holiday, starting December 1, 
2001, and lasted until December 2, 2002, for demand deposits. 
Source: Authors’ analysis. 
Terms of the Holiday 
Bank Operations and Payments during the Bank Holiday . In theory, a bank holiday is 
intended to halt all banking activity until authorities can implement a common solution to 
underlying problem s. In practice, holidays are usually not absolute . The definition of the 
holiday varies across jurisdictions. Authorities often permit banks to continue some 
operations during the holiday  and to make some payments based on considerations of 
financial stability or social welfare. Although not always stated, such allowances imply that 
the banks were permitted to continue to fulfill their normal operating obligations such as 
payroll and rent. These concessions were spelled out  in India –Yes Bank 2020, where the 
bank was expressly permitted to continue to pay its normal operating bills, such as employee 
salaries, rent, taxes, and contractors, up to INR 50,000 per account , while it was being 
restructured.  
21
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 24 ---
In US 1933, banks were permitted to “meet the needs of their communities ” for food, 
medicine, other “necessities of life,” relief of distress, payment of usual salaries and wages, 
necessary current expenditures for the purpose of maintaining employment, an d other 
similar essential purposes  (US Government 1933) . In Cyprus 2013 , authorities  permitted 
payments based on similar social welfare considerations, such as tuition fees and payments 
by government services for humanitarian reasons. They also allowed “systemically relevant 
payments,” defined as payments that , if missed,  created a risk of default for the credit 
institution or otherwise threatened financial instability (EC 2013). In Argentina 2001, the 
government made exceptions for payroll and retirement p ayments, while the bank holiday 
in Greece 2015 exempted pension payments.  
Limited Withdrawals by Depositors during the Bank Holiday. Bank holidays sometimes 
permit limited withdrawals (a) up to a specified amount on a stated frequency (Cyprus 2013, 
Greece 2015, and India–Yes Bank 2020); or (b) for specified purposes, with permission from 
an administrator or the bank (Argentina 2001, Ecuador 1999, US 1933, and US–Rhode Island 
1991). When limited withdrawals are permitted, they are usual ly for small amounts ; the 
purpose is to allow depositors to meet basic needs, while limit ing runs and maintain ing 
banking system liquidity. In Greece 2015, depositors were permitted to withdraw EUR 60 
per day from ATMs and had unlimited access to electronic banking. In India–Yes Bank 2020, 
depositors could withdraw up to INR 50,000. In Cyprus 2013, depositors could make 
withdrawals only through ATMs, subject to their bank’s ATM withdrawal limit—EUR 260 in 
the case of Cyprus’s second-largest bank, La iki Bank. In Argentina 2001, Ecuador 1999, US 
1933, and US–Rhode Island 1991, no broad-based withdrawals were permitted during the 
banking holidays.  
In most of our  bank cases, authorities allowed depositors to apply for emergency 
withdrawals of larger amounts for high-ticket, time-sensitive items, which were not always 
clearly defined. In India–Yes Bank 2020, depositors could apply to the RBI to withdraw funds 
for medical treatment, higher education, marriage, or any other “unavoidable emergency” up 
to INR 500,000; this was the only case with a stated upper limit for emergency withdrawals. 
In US–Rhode Island 1991, depositors could submit emergency withdrawal applications to 
their bank or the Depositors’ Economic Protection Corporation (DEPCO) for six reasons: (a) 
mortgage payments if they faced immediate foreclosure on their primary residence, ( b) 
overdue rent or threat of  immediate eviction, ( c) nonelective medical treatment s or 
procedures, ( d) payment s for medical insurance for self or family members, ( e) food 
expenses, and (f) utility services if facing immediate termination.  
Withdrawal Restrictions after Reopening. In US–Rhode Island 1991 and India –Yes Bank 
2020, reopened banks were permitted to resu me normal operations without withdrawal 
restrictions or account freezes . In US 1993, this was true of federal ly chartered  banks; 
however, some states imposed restrictions  on state-chartered banks, despite efforts by the 
Treasury Department to establish a common approach. 
In four of our cases involving banks, withdrawal restrictions , account freezes, or term 
extensions continued in some form after the end of the holiday for close to a year: Argentina 
22
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 25 ---
2001, Cyprus 2013, Ecuador 1999, and Greece 2015.  All these countries experienced 
significant runs—up to the permitted limits—when banks reopened (see Figure 5). 
In Argentina 2001, the government retained withdrawal restrictions on all demand deposits 
after the two week-long bank holidays in December 2001 and April 2002. At the same time, 
the government extended the maturity of time deposits. All foreign-denominated demand 
and time accounts were converted to and payable only in pesos (see Key Design Decision No. 
8, Treatment of Depositors or Investors). 
Mutual Funds 
In our two mutual fund cases, investor redemptions were entirely paused. In US–Reserve 
Fund 2008, the fund also delayed payment on shares that investors had submitted for 
redemption before the suspension was imposed . The suspension was in effect for 
approximately three months and ended once the fund’s board voted to liquidate . The 
applicable periods were approved by the SEC with effect as of the date of application by the 
fund. 
In Argentina –Funds 2019, the suspensions affected all classe s of investors , and each 
suspension was lifted on a fund -by-fund basis once the regulator issued guidance  and 
created tools to allow funds to differentiate between institutional and individual investors.  
8. Treatment of Depositors or Investors: What were the  effects on bank depositors 
and fund investors? 
Recovery of Funds and Outcomes for Depositors 
Ideally, all depositors will have complete access to  the full value of their  accounts when 
banks are permitted to reopen. This was the outcome in India–Yes Bank 2020 and in US –
Rhode Island 1991 for depositors of banks that secured federal deposit insurance permitting 
them to reopen. In US –Rhode Island  1991, the government took steps to provide some 
portion of their funds to depositors of banks that took long er to reopen or that were 
liquidated, eventually making all depositors whole. 
In US 1933, depositors at federally chartered banks had full access to their accounts when 
permitted to reopen immediately after the holiday . However, some US state authorities 
permitted banks to reopen with restrictions and, despite efforts toward a coordinated 
response, 1,685 state banks (approximately 10% of all commercial banks) were permitted 
to reopen with withdrawal restrictions following the holiday. Some banks reopened after the 
initial phased  reopening, and many banks were liquidated. After complaints, the RFC 
ensured that depositors received immediate access to their funds from banks in liquidation. 
In the other bank cases , the authorities imposed broad -based withdrawal restrictions , 
account freezes , or capital controls  upon reopening.  In Ecuador 1999, those restrictions 
extended to repurchasing agreements and investment fund accounts. In Argentina 2001 and 
Ecuador 1999, the governments also imposed limits on withdrawals from foreign currency 
23
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 26 ---
accounts to improve their ability to access and manage foreign reserves. Some of these 
restrictions lasted for more than a year. 
Timing Issues. Prolonged restrictions on withdrawals can severely harm depositors’ 
financial well-being and erode public trust in both the banking system and the government. 
In Greece 2015, a 22-day bank holiday was followed by years of withdrawal restrictions and 
capital controls that were not fully lifted until September 2019, more than four years later. 
In Argentina 2001, the government imposed withdrawal limits in December 2001, sparking 
significant public backlash ; nonetheless, the government maintained the restrictions until 
the following year, with two interim bank holi days, and term deposits remained restricted 
until early 2003. Protracted bank holidays also contributed to political and social unrest in 
Ecuador 1999.  
Differences by Insured Status and Type of Account. In our cases, guaranteed depositors 
were always made whole . As noted  in Key Design Decision No. 7 , Details of Holidays, 
Suspensions, or Gates,  some authorities subjected t erm deposit s to longer -lasting 
restrictions, and some imposed tougher restrictions on foreign currency accounts. 
Even when ban ks did not reopen after the end of the bank holiday and were subject to 
restructuring or liquidation, we observed better outcomes for insured deposit account 
holders. In Greece  2015, Argentina  2001, and Ecuador 1999, depositors of unguaranteed 
accounts wer e repaid but subjected to some haircut  or devaluation. In Cyprus 2013,  the 
holiday ended after a new funding proposal was negotiated that included a plan to 
restructure the largest Cypriot bank and resolve the second largest. As part of this plan, the 
insured depositors of the second-largest bank were protected and transferred to the largest 
bank, the Bank of Cyprus. The uninsured deposits in Bank of Cyprus were converted to equity 
and used to recapitalize the bank , while the uninsured deposit s of Laiki Bank, the second-
largest bank, remained with the legacy bank while in liq uidation. Uninsured depositors at 
Laiki Bank eventually received 6 cents on the euro. The only uninsured deposits protected 
were those in the United Kingdom, which were transferred to the UK subsidiary of the Bank 
of Cyprus.  This type of unexpected treatment among different uninsured depositors ma y 
create credibility issues for authorities. 
In US 1933, deposit insurance did not exist  at the time. A sizable number of banks were 
permanently closed and liquidated after the holiday ended. Following complaints, the 
government issued collateralized loans to nonviable institutions to ensure that the banks 
could grant depositors access to their funds.  
In US–Rhode Island 1991, financial institutions that could not qualify for federal insuranc e 
and remained closed were some of the largest  in the state, with a total of USD 1.2 billion in 
350,000 accounts. Some  of these banks merged with stronger banks to receive federal 
insurance, while others were taken over by DEPCO for resolution. DEPCO guaranteed the full 
amount of depositor accounts , including previously unguaranteed amounts , although 
unguaranteed amounts were paid out over time.  
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 27 ---
In Cyprus 2013, fixed -term deposits could not be terminated before their maturity unless  
the funds were used to repay a loan with the same credit institution. The authorities kept 
this restriction in place after the initial holiday ended and did not lift it until April 2015. 
Differences by Type of Depositor . As noted in Key Design Decision No. 7, Details of 
Holidays, Suspensions, or Gates, authorities often exempt or grant early access to depositors 
with small account balances, pensioners, or other selected groups. In Ecuador 1999, the 
government announced a partial deposit freeze upon the end of the bank holiday, with a 
staggered unfreezing schedule that favored depositors with less than 2 million Ecuadorian 
sucres (ECS) and other groups such as insurance entities, the elderly, those affected by 
medical emergencies, savings and credit cooperatives, international agencies, and 
diplomatic missions. The unfreezing of deposits began just weeks after the announcement of 
the freeze, and by mid–2000, more than 90% of depositors had received their full deposits 
back.  
Losses to Depositors. In all holidays, depositors may suffer harm from the temporary loss 
of access to their funds. Authorities also may impose losse s on d epositors through (a) 
haircuts on account balances, (b) currency devaluations, or (c) substitutions of government 
bonds or emergency currencies that may have limited liquidity or may be subject to losses 
in a secondary market. 
In our cases, authorities did not impose losses equally on all types of depositors. In fact, none 
of our cases included a direct broad-based haircut on all depositor accounts. In Cyprus 2013, 
the authorities proposed , but ultimately did not implement , a plan to tax all insured a nd 
uninsured depositors.  
Depositors in Argentina 2001 eventually received the full nominal value of their accounts in 
cash (pesos) or government bonds but were subject to significant devaluation due to the 
government’s asymmetric conversion to pesos. To make the government bonds attractive, 
authorities created a secondary market and allowed depositors to use them to repay certain 
types of loans and national taxes . However, roughly 200,000 depositors sued the 
government and won, receiving payouts at market rates  without the effect of pesoization . 
The successful lawsuits significantly undermined the government’s strategy and forced the 
executive to impose a second bank holiday.  
In Ecuador 1999, depositors were repaid in US dollars at a much lower value than before the 
crisis—losing about 73% of their money owing to currency devaluation.  
In Argentina 2001, Cyprus 2013, and Ecuador 199 9, governments used some type of 
currency substitute to compensate depositors. In Ecuador 199 9, while all depositors 
eventually received compensation equal to the nominal value of their accounts , the 
government employed two cash alternatives or currency substitute s to compensate  
depositors: AGD bonds (bonds issued to banks by the government in lieu of cash to be used 
to liquidate depositors ’ accounts) and certificates of reprogrammed deposits (certificados 
de depósito reprogrammable, or CDRs) (negotiable securities that were discounted based on 
the market’s perception of the financial strength of the issuing bank ). Term depositors at 
25
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 28 ---
open banks were repaid fully in cash , whereas some term depositors at closed banks could 
be repaid in AGD bonds.17 Depositors could request CDRs from their bank against the frozen 
part of their account ; however, depositors holding accounts worth the same amount could  
receive different CDR payouts based on the strength of their banks . Both AGD bonds and 
CDRs were subject to limitations on how they could be used , and the discounting of CDRs 
created an arbitrage opportunity to the detriment of depositors and the government.18  
Currency substitutes risk creating a sense of unfairness and confusion in the public. The US 
government in US  1933 had made provisions to have banks, through their clearinghouse 
associations, issue certificates in lieu of cash, and some states considered issuing  statewide 
scrip; both tools had been used in earlier crises. However, these tools were ultimately used 
only minimally to avoid confusing the public  and because policymakers preferred a 
nationwide solution. 
Treatment of Bank Investors. Bondholders and shareholders of liquidated banks often 
experience losses. In our cases, those included investors in contingent convertible bonds in 
India–Yes Bank 2020; their bonds were a type of alternative Tier 1 (AT1) capital, meaning 
investors knew in advance that they might suffer losses in a restructuring . In Cyprus 2013, 
external financing from the IMF, EU, and E CB depended on the government ’s agreement to 
liquidate the second-largest Cypriot bank and recapitalize the largest bank, forcing losses on 
uninsured depositors in both banks.  
Mutual Fund Investors  
The outcomes for investors in our two fund cases differed. In US–Reserve Fund 2008, the 
fund entered liquidation following the suspension. However, the SEC challenged the fund’s 
initial liquidation plan in court , as the fund had reserved a large portion of  fund assets to 
cover its legal fees. The court ruled in favor of the SEC ’s alternate plan , which was more 
favorable to investors. Investors had received 79 cents per dollar by early December 2008 
and 99 cents two years later.  
In Argentina–Funds 2019, both retail and institutional investors received the full value of 
their investments , although payments to institutional investors were delayed under the 
terms of the maturity extension that the government had placed on certain classes of short-
term debt. Moreover, the CNV ruled that retail investors with affected assets could either (a) 
hold their shares to the original maturity or ( b) redeem their fund shares in the affected 
 
17 However, some depositors at open banks were repaid in bonds before the ruling. Depositors could use the 
bonds to pay certain liabilities owed to the bank or government and could sell the bonds to a third party for 
cash, sometimes subject to a discount. 
18 Depositors could use CDRs to service bank loans and buy durable consumer goods and real estate , and a 
government decree in November 1999 required all banks to accept CDRs as payments at face value, up to the 
amount of credit lines granted to each bank by th e National Financial Corporation ( Corporación Financiera 
Nacional, or CFN), which guaranteed the CDRs. Many depositors who needed cash sold their CDRs at a discount to 
bank borrowers, who then used them, at par value, to repay their eligible liabilities , benefiting from the spread. 
The traffic in CDRs was significant. According to the IMF, the November 1999 decree negatively impacted banks’ 
liquidity and portfolio structure and led to “the technical bankruptcy of the CFN” (IMF 2000). The rules were later 
changed to require the banks and CFN to accept CDRs at market value instead of par . 
26
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 29 ---
securities for compensation in -kind, meaning payment in securities of equal value to  their 
initial investments. Institutional investors had the same choice, subject to the extended 
maturities. 
9. Verification of Solvency : Did the authorities verify the solvency or assess the 
viability of banks before reopening? What methods did they use? 
In five of our seven bank cases, our research found either an official report verifying the 
solvency or viability of financial institutions (Ecuador 1999, US 1933, and US–Rhode Island 
1991) or explicit official references to viability considerations (Greece 2015, India–Yes Bank 
2020). Either the government  or a third party  handled the verification , and in all cases, it 
seems that results were disclosed. Having a third party  conduct the review can be 
particularly valuable when the gover nment has credibility issues , as occurred in Ecuador 
1999. 
In US–Rhode Island 1991, verification of solvency  was part of the process for the financial 
institutions subject to the holiday to qualify for federal insurance that was needed for them 
to reopen . Because several institutions had initiated their applications before RISDIC’s 
failure, they were able to re open expeditiously.19 In Greece 2015, as part of the multilateral 
funding program that enabled the banks to reopen, the ECB conducted a comprehensive 
assessment of the four significant Greek banks a few months after the end of the holiday. 
Following the assessment, banks had to provide plans to address their capital shortfalls to 
be considered for capital injections (see (Schaefer-Brown 2024)). 
In the case of India–Yes Bank 2020, the authorities didn’t announce an official verification of 
the bank’s solvency before reopening. Rather, the recapitalization of the bank by public and 
private investors, the 50% rise in the bank’s stock price following the early termination of 
the moratorium, and the bank’s financial disclosures served to reassure the market of its 
viability.  
In US 1933, two factors contributed to the successful ending of the nationwide bank holiday 
and the reopening of the banks . First, the government categorized the banks into three 
groups: (a) those that were “sound” and ready to reopen, ( b) those that could reopen with 
government assistance , and ( c) those that might not reopen and would need to be 
reorganized or liquidated. Those in the first group, having been licensed to reopen by the 
Treasury Department or a state authority, were then reopened in phases over three days. 
Second, the reopening plan was effectively communicated to the public , with President 
Roosevelt assuring the public that any bank reopening was sound, no matter when it 
reopened. 
Authorities prioritized the expediency of reopening over the risks and cost to the 
government of inaccurate viability evaluations. Because of time constraints, decisions were 
 
19 For example, the National Credit Union Administration  (NCUA) received 33 applications from credit unions 
in November 1990 and conducted a five-week examination of all applications. On December 21, the NCUA found 
22 credit unions eligible, and these institutions reopened on January 7, 1991, just six days after the governor 
declared the bank holiday. 
27
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 30 ---
often based on outdated bank examiner reports. Uncertainty about asset valuations was also 
significant, given the ongoing stresses. And a uthorities reopened s ome weak banks early 
owing to considerations of geographical distribution and politic s, rather than solvency or 
viability.  
Conti-Brown and Vanatta (2021) find that the Roosevelt administration ’s distinction 
between viable and nonviable banks and its commitment to closing nonviable banks added 
credibility to the government ’s claim that the re opened banks were sound.  Nonetheless, at 
the time, Treasury officials were concerned that the phased reopening could stigmatize 
banks that reopened relatively late, and r ecent research by Jaremski, R ichardson, and 
Vossmeyer (2023) has confirmed this: they find that banks that reopened earlier enjoyed a 
premium compared to similarly healthy banks that opened days later  (Conti-Brown and 
Vanatta 2021; Jaremski, Richardson, and Vossmeyer 2023).  
In Ecuador 1999, following the government’s imposition of a year-long partial deposit freeze, 
authorities hired international auditors to review the health of all financial institutions and 
classify them as compliant with regulatory capital standards , deficient capital, or negative  
capital; banks with negative capital were  immediately taken over by the government’s 
deposit insurance agency . The results of these audits, announced in July 1999, spurred a 
temporary resurgence in public confidence in the banking system ; but confidence fell again 
in September when Ecuador defaulted on its debt. Starting in March 2000, the Banking Board 
of the Superintendency of Banks  reviewed all banks again, requiring banks with solvency 
indexes below the regulatory threshold of 9% to normalize within 60 days or be take n over 
by the insurance agency. By the next month, the insurance agency had intervened in or closed 
14 institutions found to be nonviable, including the two largest Ecuadorian banks 
(comprising 65% of onshore assets), wiping out their equity holders.  
Mutual Funds 
In both fund cases, the funds assessed their financial health in communications to 
shareholders and regulators. In the case of US–Reserve Fund 2008, the SEC alleged that the 
fund manager had violated federal securities laws by issuing erroneous disclosures about its 
net asset value. The fund later blamed an “administrative error” for its misreporting of the 
NAV and admitted that it should have alerted the public and the authorities earlier that it 
had broken the buck (SEC n.d.). Our research did not reveal that any Argentine funds broke 
the buck because of the government’s 2019 debt restructuring. 
10. Other Conditions: Did the authorities impose a ny other significant conditions  as 
part of the bank holiday? 
Other conditions varied across the cases surveyed but were generally linked to specific 
corrective actions. In several cases where banks were restructured (Cyprus 2013, India–Yes 
Bank 2020), authorities stepped into decision -making roles by appointing new boards. In 
two cases with sovereign  debt crises ( Argentina 2001 and Greece 2015), the governments 
enacted measures to keep capital within the country and support the domestic economy. For 
28
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 31 ---
more information on both restructuring and capital controls (see Key Design Decision No. 2, 
Part of a Package).  
During the US National Bank Holiday in 1933, federal and state authorities attempted to 
disincentivize hoarding and unnecessary withdrawals of currency and gold. Roosevelt ’s 
proclamations banned buying or selling gold in any form other than jewelry, and some state 
legislatures passed other measures. News sources report that USD 200 million in gold had 
been returned to the banking system five days after the national holiday. 
11. Exit Strategy: How was the situation resolved?  
We identified two exit strategies among our bank holiday cases: (a) authorities were able to 
apply effective corrective actions to address the underlying distress and reopen viable banks 
as soon as possible without restric tions, leaving the remaining banks in workout until they 
could be reopened or resolved ; and ( b) authorities were unable to quickly correct the 
underlying problem but chose to reopen viable banks with restrictions to provide depositors 
some access to their accounts while continuing to pursue a full resolution to the fundamental 
problem.  
In our cases, the law gave the authorities broad discretion to determine the duration  of the 
bank holiday; the nature of the underlying distress and other factors greatly influenced the 
length of the bank holiday and any withdrawal restrictions. Some of these considerations 
were statutory limits (India –Yes Bank 2020), fiscal constraints, the complexity of the 
necessary corrective actions (Argentina 2001, Cyprus 2013, Ecuador 1999, and Greece 
2015), and the need for additional regulation (US 1933, US–Rhode Island 1991). Considering 
the many unknowns surrounding a bank holiday, policymakers may see a benefit in initially 
announcing a relatively short holiday and then extending i t, if needed, rather than 
announcing a prolonged shutdown at the beginning. This was done in Cyprus 2013 and 
Greece 2015. And in India–Yes Bank 2020, the law allowed the authorities to suspend a bank 
for up to six months. They initially announced that the suspension would last up to 30 days—
but then lifted it after just 13 days, and the bank recovered successfully.  
The bank holida ys in our cases were generally of short duration. Authorities are typically 
aware of the economic risks of keeping banks closed for extended periods . The shortest 
holiday among our cases was a six-day holiday in Argentina 2001, and the longest was a 22-
day holiday in Greece 2015; both were system-wide. In both cases, as well as in Cyprus 2013, 
substantial withdrawal restrictions, sometimes accompanied  by capital controls, persisted 
for a year  or more, and depositors had to wait extended periods for full access to their 
accounts. 
In most cases, the authorities initially announced a definitive deadline for the holidays but 
extended them later to facilitate further corrective actions. In US 1933, President Roosevelt 
announced a four-day holiday (March 6 to March 9, 1933) of all transactions at all deposit -
taking institutions. He considered an indefinite holiday unwise.  But on March 9, Roosevelt 
extended the banking holiday “in full force and effect until further proclamation by the 
President” (Roosevelt 1933). Three days later, on March 12, following further actions via 
29
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 32 ---
Executive Order, the president explained the reopening plan to the public. “Sound” banks 
began reopening on March 13, pursuant to a three -phase schedule, and by March 15, banks 
representing 90% of the country’s banking resources had resumed operations.  
In US–Rhode Island 1991, Governor Sundlun declared the bank holiday on January 1, 1991, 
his first day in office; the bank holiday did not have a definitive ending. T he governor 
encouraged the 45 impacted banks and credit unions to qualify for federal deposit insurance 
as soon as possible or seek other means to secure such insurance indirectly by selling 
themselves, merging with an insured institution, or recapitalization. By the end of January, 
26 financial institutions had reopened with federal deposit insurance and no restrictions; a 
further 15 also later reopened. Institutions subject to the holiday remained so until they 
qualified to reopen or were resolved, which in some cases took years.  
In Argentina 2001, Cyprus 2013, Ecuador 1999, and Greece 2015 , authorities were unable 
for reasons of resources or politics to apply corrective actions during the holiday that fully 
resolved the underlying problem that led to the holiday: sovereign debt crises for Argentina 
and Ecuador and liquidity cris es for Cyprus and Greece. In each case, authorities reopened 
the banks but imposed withdrawal restrictions or capital controls to manage the flow of 
funds. In these cases, restrictions and controls remained in place for extended periods as 
authorities addressed the unde rlying problems.  In Argentina 2001, Cyprus 2013, and 
Ecuador 1999 , withdrawal restrictions were in place for a full year after the holiday. In 
Greece 2015, authorities began to lift withdrawal restrictions and capital controls in 2017 
but did not fully remove them until 2019.  
Fund Suspensions 
The Reserve Primary Fund never reopened. Although the fund administrator had said at one 
point that it would provide credit support to the fund to mainta in its USD 1.00 NAV , as 
sponsors of other funds did, the SEC later alleged that these statements had been fraudulent 
since the administrator had made no concrete efforts to make that happen . The SEC also 
challenged the liquidation plan the administrator put forward as not in the best interest of 
investors; eventually, a plan that the SEC proposed was approved by a court and 
implemented. Investors recovered about half their funds at the end of October 2008 and 79 
cents for every dollar by early December; they waited two years for recoveries to reach 99 
cents (see Key Design Decision No. 8, Treatment of Depositors or Investors ). The fund was 
terminated in late December 2015.  
In Argentina–Funds 2019, funds reopened at different times depending on how quickly they 
were able to set up the operational capacity to segregate funds and provide exempt 
treatment to individual investors. Funds with larger numbers of individual investors and 
higher percentages of the affected securities faced greater operational challeng es. Most 
funds resumed normal redemption activity within two weeks after the initial announcement 
date. However, institutional investors remained subject to the terms of the maturity 
extension placed on certain classes of government short-term debt. 
30
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 33 ---
12. Regulatory Changes : Were any regulatory changes implemented because of the 
crisis? 
Crises, including bank holidays, are often followed by regulatory reform. In US 1933, 
Congress also passed the Glass -Steagall Banking Act, which comprehensively reformed the 
US banking system, creating more formal separation between commercial banking activities 
and investment activities. The law also created the Federal Open Ma rket Committee of the 
Federal Reserve to set monetary policy and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC), which began providing coverage for up to USD 2,500 per depositor on January 1, 
1934, and which has been a strong deterrent to bank runs.  
Similarly, in India–Yes Bank 2020, in the year after the holiday, India’s Parliament passed an 
amendment to the deposit insurance bill, which ensured the payment of the newly increased 
insurance amount of INR 500,000 within 90 days of any bank’s being placed in a moratorium. 
The finance minister stated that this legislative change would benefit small depositors. The 
RBI also updated its guidelines for auditor selection and tenure for banks in India in response 
to issues that Yes Bank’s rescue raised. The central bank also reduced the minimum tenure 
to change auditors to three years and introduced restrictions on the ability to audit multiple 
entities within the same or related corporate groups. The RBI also upgraded technology 
systems to allow for real -time sup ervision, to quicken the feedback and supervision 
processes of banks and nonbanks.  
In the aftermath of the RISDIC crisis in Rhode Island, nearly half of all privately insured credit 
unions nationwide transitioned to federal deposit insurance . The 1991 Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) also introduced reforms for federal 
deposit insurance that included risk-based premiums. Following the failure of the Reserve 
Primary Fund in 2008, the SEC made several amendments to its money market fund rules. 
These amendments included revised standards for credit, liquidity,  and interest rate risk  
management; diversification requirements ; stress testing ; monthly portfolio disclosures; 
and procedures for funds that break the buck. 
Conclusion 
This paper surveys seven bank holiday cases and two fund suspension cases ; each case 
represents an extreme situation. Holidays were most effective when the authorities were 
able to use the time to design and implement a solution to fundamental issues and determine 
which banks could safely reopen. 
A bank holiday is a high-risk tool but can be an effective “measure of last resort” in 
extreme situations to buy time to enable a comprehensive remedy. Halting banking and 
payment systems po ses risks to a  country’s financial system and broader economy. Thus, 
bank holidays are  rare, especially in advanced economies, and typically represent a last 
resort when all other options have failed. A bank holiday is most useful when a banking 
system is experiencing widespread distress and a comprehensive and coordinated solution, 
31
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 34 ---
rather than ad hoc or fragmented remedies, would be beneficial, as in the cases of Argentina 
2001, Cyprus 2013, Greece 2015, and US 1933.  
If only a limited n umber of banks are in distress , and where contagion has not become 
prevalent, similar to the events in India–Yes Bank 2020, applying a more tailored approach—
recapitalizing or resolving the affected bank(s)—as was done in that case,  may be a better 
solution. We thus recommend that policymakers explore less disruptive  and more 
circumscribed solutions if available and employ bank holidays  only in extreme 
circumstances. 
A bank holiday can also be useful to ring-fence distressed banks and differentiate them from 
healthy ones . Subjecting distressed banks t o a bank holiday identifies which banks are 
affected and can mitigate contagion from impacting other institutions. This effect was 
demonstrated in US–Rhode Island 1991 and Argentina–Funds 2019. One could hypothesize 
the utility of a bank holiday in other situations where a broad shock (such as a natural 
disaster or cyberattack) incapacitates a large number of banks or sparks runs. In such a case, 
ring-fencing the affected banks until the pr oblem can be diagnosed and a solution 
determined might allow for a more effective response.  
The primary benefit of a holiday is that it allows  for the implementation of  a 
coordinated response to  the underlying distress.  A bank holiday does not cure the 
underlying distress but rather temporarily pauses banking activity, allowing policymakers  
to stabilize the situation and create space to implement corrective actions. Such measures 
can address the essential problems and restore confidence in the banks ’ viability (Collyns 
and Kincaid 2003). Further, a broad-based holiday allows for a coordinated comprehensive 
solution that can signal the stability of the entire system, something that may not be achieved 
through the remediation of an individual bank (Fed n.d.). 
Policymakers should strive to implement corrective actions (deposit insurance and 
guarantees; liquidity; recapitalization, restructuring, or resolution ; and assessments of 
viability) that address the core vulnerabilities in  the system and to match the sco pe of 
corrective actions to the scope of the underlying problem.  Multiple corrective actions may 
be required. The US 1933 case is a good example of a coordinated national response that 
required multiple corrective actions. When President Roosevelt declared a nationwide bank 
holiday, most banks in all 48 states were already subject to a mishmash of ad hoc municipal 
and state bank holidays and withdrawal restrictions. The public had lost confidence in banks 
and begun to hoard cash and gold. The national bank holiday enabled the federal government 
to implement an aggressive nationwide response including emergency liquidity, a review of 
bank viability , and ad hoc bailouts on a massive scale that resulted in th e successful 
reopening of viable banks and restoration of the public’s confidence.  
Such a comprehensive response may especially be needed when an exogenous shock causes 
the distress to the system , such as a sovereign debt crisis (Argentina 2001) or the su dden 
drying up of liquidity (Cyprus 2013 and Greece  2015), resulting in widespread runs . Fund 
suspensions were employed in a similar manner in Argentina –Funds 2019 in response to a 
sudden law change. In such cases, the government has to address the exogenous shock as 
32
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 35 ---
well as stabilize the banks; often , the ability to do so depends on factors and actors outside 
the government’s control and can require a lengthy process. In such cases, the bank holiday 
provides the opportunity for the government to  control banking activity while addressing 
the shock (which may mean reopening banks with withdrawal restrictions). Because the 
shock originates outside the system, stigma and contagion may be more contained in such 
situations and trust in the banks less damaged when they reopen since the primary focus is 
on the government addressing the exogenous problem. 
Policymakers should also weigh the need for a co mprehensive response to the banking 
system distress against the ease and effectiveness of a more focused inte rvention and their 
available resources ; a broad -based holiday implicates all banks . In Ecuador 1999, the 
president imposed a broad bank holiday rather than place a large, failing bank into 
receivership, as the central bank had recommended. The result was a n extended economic 
and financial crisis, during which the board of the central bank resigned in protest.  If 
resources for robust corrective actions are limited, as was the case in Ecuador, policymakers 
might consider a more tailored approach, bypassing the bank holiday and instead imposing 
withdrawal restrictions, which the government  in Argentina 2001  did. However, any 
withdrawal restrictions must be sufficiently robust to provide the government the level of 
control necessary for a successful strategy. If  not, as in Argentina 2001 (where the effect of 
the restrictions was gutted by the large number of court claims awarding relief inconsistent 
with the withdrawal restrictions), total holidays may still be needed. 
Even when authorities impose a bank holiday or restrictions on only one or a few banks , 
contagion is a risk, which in turn  can trigger fear about the health of the entire financial 
system (Duvvuri 2024). Depositors are aware that financial institutions are interconnected. 
Policymakers should anticipate such risks and, if possible, introduce corrective actions that 
will address such concerns and mitigate contagion. The Indian government ’s expansion of 
deposit insurance in the Yes Bank 2020 case before placing the bank under a moratorium 
served that purpose. In the US –Reserve Fund 2008 case, widespread redemptions among 
prime funds subsided after the Fed implemented the new facilities to provide liquidity to 
eligible funds (SEC 2010; SEC 2023; Shapiro 2012; US GAO 2023). 
Several of our cases also suggest that a history of bank holidays or restrictions can aggravate 
contagion in a  crisis and detract from the efficacy of the tools. In Argentina 2001, Cyprus 
2013, and Ecuador 1999, a record of previous  bank holidays or withdrawal restrictions 
fueled runs during new periods of distress, before the bank holiday was declared. Research 
from the SEC also found that its regulation permitting, but not requiring, fund administrators 
to impose a redemption gate (suspension) on a fund at a certain liquidity thr eshold to 
provide a “cooling off ” period had the opposite effect. A dministrators avoided using this 
feature, and investors ran in anticipation that a redemption gate would be imposed at the 
threshold (SEC 2022, 7252). Policymakers should consider the se aggravating effects when 
deciding whether to impose a bank holiday and work to mitigate them.  
Authorities should take steps to reopen only banks that are viable —potentially by 
injecting new capital —so that runs do not restart.  The success of any bank h oliday is 
dependent on the ability of the government to (a) apply appropriate corrective actions to 
33
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 36 ---
address the underlying problem and then ( b) reopen only viable banks. Our cases and the 
literature suggest that this formula will promote successful reopeni ng and that 
differentiation—between viable banks, which reopen, and unsound banks, which do not—is 
critical to restore trust in the banks (see US 1933 and US –Rhode Island 1991). Doing 
otherwise, especially reopening nonviable banks, risks a restart of runs and a continued lack 
of trust in the banking system. Policymakers should be prepared to inject capital into banks 
that need it to be viable before reopening and support reopened banks with additional 
liquidity if needed (see US 1933).  
Policymakers should also communicate to depositors and the public the efforts undertaken 
to ensure viability, which will help contain contagion. In the India–Yes Bank 2020 case, the 
RBI issued reassuring statements regarding the stability of the system when Yes Bank 
reopened. In US 1933, authorities provided broad-based liquidity so that the reopened banks 
could satisfy withdrawal requests, de facto guaranteed all deposits, and communicated to 
the public the steps taken to ensure that the reopened banks were “sound.”  
If authorities cannot expeditiously apply corrective actions to resolve the underlying 
distress, reopening the banks  with withdrawal  restrictions will enable control of  
banking activity until a full resolution can be achieved. Fiscal or political challenges can 
hinder authorities’ ability to quickly resolve banking problems. However, banks are critical 
to a country’s economy, and governments are typically under pressure to reopen their banks 
swiftly once they have implemented a bank holiday . In four of our cases —Argentina 2001, 
Cyprus 2013, Ecuador 1999, and Greece 2015 —the authorities reopened banks  without 
having resolved the underlying stresses as a result of either  limited fiscal capacity, political 
will, lack of infrastructure, or circumstances outside their control, such as the time needed 
to (a) renegotiate external funding (Argentina 2001 and Ecuador 1999 ) or (b) address 
currency stresses (Cyprus 2013 and Greece 2015). However,  recognizing the run risk, the 
governments continued to restrict some banking activities, impos ing withdrawal 
restrictions, account freezes, or term extensions , to control withdrawals of funds until a 
more definitive solution to the underlying problem could be implemented. In Argentina 2001 
and Ecuador 1999, banking crises were made worse by simultaneous currency crises, 
prompting the governments to also impose capital controls to prevent money from leaving 
the country.  
Reopening banks with withdrawal limits may enable authorities to manage outflows  while 
working toward a broader solution. However, restrictions of any type present a  high risk of 
disaffection from depositors and the public and can damage the public ’s trust in the 
government and banking system (see Key Design Decisions No. 2, Part of a Package, and No. 
8, Treatment of Depositors or Investors). If restrictions are needed, policymakers should 
consider those which minimize losses to depositors and appear fair and should contemplate 
lifting restrictions as soon as possible . Doing so is likely to promote increased cooperation 
and minimize negative perceptions from the public compared  to broad restrictions 
maintained in place for long periods.  
Whichever approach is employed, communicating clearly and effectively to deposi tors and 
the public the efforts being made to resolve the situation and reestablish depositor access to 
34
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 37 ---
the full amount of their funds is highly recommended to engage public cooperation and 
minimize civic unrest. 
Policymakers should take steps in advance to create stable banks  and regulatory 
infrastructure, mitigate runs, and avoid the need for a bank ho liday. Credible deposit 
insurance should prevent bank runs, when effectively communicated and fortified by a 
rigorous bank supervisory regime and a tailored resolution process. Such tools should 
empower authorities to effectively address troubled banks pro actively and minimize or 
eliminate the need for a bank holiday. The availability of such tools will also promote stable 
banks that may best be able to withstand exogenous shocks that might make a bank holiday 
or withdrawal restrictions unavoidable. 
  
35
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 38 ---
References  
Awalt, Francis Gloyd. 1969. “Recollections of the Banking Crisis in 1933.” Business History 
Review 43, no. 3: 347–71.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4149 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed). 2023. “Review of the Federal 
Reserve’s Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank.” April 28, 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4025 
———. n.d. “Bank Suspensions, 1921-1936.”  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5501 
British Broadcasting Company (BBC). 1999. “Ecuador’s President Addresses Nation on 
Economic Crisis.” British Broadcasting Company, March 12, 1999.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4415/ 
Central Bank of Cyprus (CBC). 2013. “The Enforcement of Restrictive Measures on 
Transactions in Case of Emergency Law of 2013 (Unofficial Translation).” Press release, 
March 28, 2013.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5179 
Collyns, Charles, and G. Russell Kincaid, eds. 2003. “Managing Financial Crises: Recent 
Experience and Lessons for Latin America.” IMF Occasional Paper No. 217, April 10, 2003.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5503 
Conti-Brown, Peter, and Sean H. Vanatta. 2021. “The Logic and Legitimacy of Bank 
Supervision: The Case of the Bank Holiday of 1933.” Business History Review 95, no. 1: 87–
120. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/11196/ 
Das, Shaktikanta. 2020. “Indian Economy at a Crossroad: A View from Financial Stability 
Angle.” Speech delivered virtually at the Seventh Banking & Economics Conclave organized 
by the State Bank of India, July 11, 2020.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/1605 
Decker, Bailey. 2025. “Ecuador: National Bank Holiday, 1999.” Journal of Financial Crises 7, 
no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/5/ 
Duvvuri, Subba Rao. 2011. “Bank Resolution Framework Challenges in the Indian Context.” 
Inaugural address delivered at the International Association of Deposit Insurers (IAD)–
Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) International Conference, 
36
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 39 ---
organized by the DICGC, November 14, 2011, Jodhpur, India.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4326 
———. 2024. “Lessons Learned Interview by Salil Gupta, November 29, 2023.” Yale 
Program on Financial Stability Lessons Learned Oral History Project. Transcript. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5169 
European Commission (EC). 2013. “The Economic Adjustment Programme for Cyprus.” 
European Economy, Occasional Paper No. 149, May 2013. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2115 
Fitch Ratings. 2019. “Argentina Sovereign Default Highlights Mutual Fund Gating Risk.” 
Fitch Wire, September 13, 2019.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4670 
Gardephe, Paul G. 2010. Memorandum Opinion and Order – In re the Reserve Fund 
Securities and Derivative Legislation. February 24, 2010. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4058 
George, Ayodeji. 2025. “United States: National Bank Holiday, 1933.” Journal of Financial 
Crises 7, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/8/ 
George, Ayodeji, and Sophia Alden. 2025. “United States: Rhode Island Limited Bank 
Holiday, 1991.” Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/10/ 
Gupta, Salil. 2025. “India: Yes Bank Moratorium, 2020.” Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/7/ 
Heaphy, Owen. 2025. “Argentina: National Bank Holidays, 2001.” Journal of Financial Crises 
7, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/3/ 
Heaphy, Owen, and Anmol Makhija. 2025. “Argentina: Mutual Fund Suspensions, 2019.” 
Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/2/ 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2000. “Ecuador: Selected Issues and Statistical Annex.” 
IMF Staff Country Report No. 00/125, October 18, 2000.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14912 
———. 2003. “Argentina: 2002 Article IV Consultation-Staff Report.” IMF Country Report 
No. 03/226, July 2003. https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4740 
37
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 40 ---
———. 2004. “Evaluation Report: The IMF and Argentina, 1991–2001.” IMF Independent 
Evaluation Office, September 30, 2004.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4743 
Jácome H., Luis Ignacio. 2004. “The Late 1990s Financial Crisis in Ecuador: Institutional 
Weaknesses, Fiscal Rigidities, and Financial Dollarization at Work.” IMF Working Paper No. 
04/12, January 2004.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14913 
Jaremski, Matthew S., Gary Richardson, and Angela Vossmeyer. 2023. “Signals and Stigmas 
from Banking Interventions: Lessons from the Bank Holiday in 1933.” NBER Working 
Paper No. 31088, October 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4152 
Kelly, Steven, Vincient Arnold, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2025. “Ad Hoc 
Emergency Liquidity Programs in the 21st Century.” Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 1: 57–
106  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/3 
Lestz, David J. 2011. “Gates, A Primer.” Bloomberg Law Reports–Securities Law 5, nos. 34 
and 35 (September).  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5508 
Lyons, John, David Plumb, and Helen Murphy. 2001. “Argentina to Limit Withdrawals, 
Overseas Transfers.” Bloomberg News, December 1, 2001.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4744 
McNamara, Christian M., Adam Kulam, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2022. “Account 
Guarantee Survey.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2: 40–85.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/2 
McNamara, Christian M., Carey K. Mott, Salil, Gupta, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 
2024. “Survey of Resolution and Restructuring in Europe: Pre- and Post-BRRD.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 6, no. 1: 1–34.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss1/1 
Makhija, Anmol. 2025. “United States: Reserve Primary Fund Suspension, 2008.” Journal of 
Financial Crises 7, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/9/ 
Ministry of Finance (MoF). 2020. “Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) Notification - 
Extraordinary - Official Gazette.” CG-DL-E-05032020-216550, March 5, 2020. (In Hindi.) 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/1558 
Rhee, June, Junko Oguri, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2022. “Broad-Based Capital 
Injection Programs.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 1: 1–48. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss1/1 
38
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 41 ---
Rhee, June, Benjamin Hoffner, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2024. “Survey of Ad Hoc 
Capital Injections.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 3: 1–34. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/1/ 
Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1933. “Proclamation 2040—Continuing in Force the Bank Holiday 
Proclamation of March 6, 1933.” American Presidency Project, March 9, 1933. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4148 
———. 1934. On Our Way. New York: John Day Company. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4145 
Schaefer-Brown, Stella. 2024. "Greece: Piraeus Bank Capital Injection, 2015." Journal of 
Financial Crises 6, no. 3: 191–207. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/10/ 
———. 2025a. “Cyprus: National Bank Holiday, 2013.” Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/4/ 
———. 2025b. “Greece: National Bank Holiday, 2015.” Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 2. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/6/ 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). 2008. “Exhibit 5 - SEC’s Proposed Distribution 
Plan.” September 15, 2008.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4077 
———. 2010. “Money Market Fund Reform.” Final Rule, 75 Fed. Reg. 10060. March 4, 2010.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4116 
———. 2022. “Money Market Fund Reforms.” Proposed Rule, 87 Fed. Reg. 7248. February 
8, 2022.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5505 
———. 2023. “Money Market Fund Reforms; Form PF Reporting Requirements for Large 
Liquidity Fund Advisers; Technical Amendments to Form N–CSR and Form N–1A.” Final 
Rule, 88 Fed. Reg. 51404. August 3, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5506 
Shapiro, L. Mary. 2012. “Perspectives on Money Market Mutual Fund Reforms.” Testimony 
before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, June 21, 2012. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4078 
Unsal, D. Filiz, and Hendre Garbers. 2021. “Central Bank Communication through COVID-
19—Focusing on Monetary Policy.” IMF Special Series on COVID-19, February 3, 2021. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5507 
  
39
Survey of Bank Holidays and Fund Suspensions Wiggins et al.

--- Page 42 ---
US Government. 1933. “Documents and Statements Pertaining to the Banking Emergency.” 
March 31, 1933.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/11236/ 
US Government Accountability Office (US GAO). 2023. “Money Market Mutual Funds: 
Pandemic Revealed Unresolved Vulnerabilities.” Report No. GAO-23-105535, February 
2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4122 
Copyright 2025 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this mater ial or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
40
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2