--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Liquidity Facilities Provided to Banks during the Dominican Liquidity Facilities Provided to Banks during the Dominican 
Republic Financial Crisis of 2003 Republic Financial Crisis of 2003 
Marco Porfirio Martínez 
Financial Stability Subdirectorate, CBDR 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Porfirio Martínez, Marco (2025) "Liquidity Facilities Provided to Banks during the Dominican Republic 
Financial Crisis of 2003," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 683-689. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1636 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/26 
This Note is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This note is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/
iss1/26

--- Page 3 ---
ARCHIVE NOTE 
 
 
Liquidity Facilities Provided to Banks during the 
Dominican Republic Financial Crisis of 20031 
Marco Porfirio Martínez2 
April 15, 2025 
Abstract 
As part of an agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Central Bank of the 
Dominican Republic (CBDR) released a comprehensive document providing an overview of 
the origins and handling of the 2003 financial crisis. This Archive Note builds on the 
highlights of that document by discussing primary factors that led to problems within Banco 
Intercontinental (Baninter), the bank that triggered the crisis; detailing measures the CBDR 
implemented to mitigate the situation; and addressing the consequences for two other major 
banks, Banco Mercantil and Bancrédito. 
 
Keywords: Baninter, CBDR, Dominican Republic 
  
 
1 This archive note is part of a Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project case 
studies considering ad hoc emergency liquidity programs. The cases are available from the Journal of Financial 
Crises at https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1. 
2 Technical Coordinator, Financial Stability Subdirectorate, CBDR . 
683

--- Page 4 ---
ARCHIVE NOTE 
 
 
Overview 
Starting in mid-2002, Banco Intercontinental (Baninter), the third-largest bank by asset size 
in the Dominican Republic at the time, faced a liquidity shortage owing to significant deposit 
withdrawals related to  ongoing administrative mismanagement and fraudulent practices. 
The bank sought assistance from the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (CBDR), which 
began providing liquidity in September 2002 through ad hoc liquidity advances and discount 
window loans (Guzmán et al. 2005; World Bank 2004).  
Despite liquidity provision from the authorities, Baninter’s shortage s persisted because of 
severe accounting errors that induced the CBDR to undertake “successive extension s” of its 
facilities (Guzmán et al. 2005, 28). In mid-January 2003, the CBDR discovered irregularities 
in the registration of the assistance the bank received: Baninter management had recorded 
the official liquidity assistance as deposits, thus severely underrepresenting to the public the 
decline in deposits (Guzmán et al. 2005).  
In March 2003, the Monetary Board 3 arranged for a much smaller  private bank, Banco 
Dominicano del Progreso (Progreso), to acquire 90 % of the shares of Baninter and take 
control of its operations. However, t he due diligence process revealed that  Baninter was 
engaged in parallel accounting to hide illegal activities , which were deliberately omitted 
from the bank’s official books. Baninter kept a separate set of books to record payments for 
personal expenses of top executives and shareholders, financing of businesses connected to 
related parties, donations, and other fraudulent disbursements. By hiding these expenses 
while understating its deposit obligations, Baninter effectively evad ed regulatory reserve 
requirements (CBDR 2003b; Guzmán et al. 2005). 
The bank’s unreported assets and liabilities in its parallel accounting system had doubled as 
a result of  the continuation of these bad pract ices over the course of a decade . Baninter’s 
reported assets amounted to 26 billion Dominican pesos (DOP; USD 1.1 billion).4 The parallel 
accounting showed additional assets worth DOP 55 billion, which was more than two-thirds 
of the Dominican Republic’s national budget at the time. The combined size of the bank, 
approximately DOP 81 billion, made Baninter the largest bank in the country. Given these 
revelations of widespread accounting fraud  and the guarantees that Progreso demanded 
against the potential liabilities, merger negotiations broke down within a month (Guzmán et 
al. 2005). 
On April 8, 2003, the CBDR announced the takeover of Baninter due to the bank’s failure to 
comply with the liquidity regularization and shareholder recapitalization plans proposed by 
the Monetary Board following the failed merger with Progreso. The CBDR emphasized in its 
statement that it would ensure the public’s deposits remained secure and that the bank’s 
operations would continue under the supervision of an administrative commission.  It was 
 
3 The Monetary Board is the highest monetary authority responsible for determining monetary, exchange rate, 
and financial policies. This body is made up of the governor of the Central Bank, the minister of finance, and the 
superintendent of banks, in addition to six members appointed by the Executive Branch  (CBDR n.d.). 
4 Per the CBDR, USD 1 = DOP 22.7 in March 2003. 
684
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
ARCHIVE NOTE 
 
 
not until May that the CBDR revealed to the general public the situation of Baninter and 
initiated legal proceedings against the bank’s main executives (CBDR 2003b; World Bank 
2004).  
The CBDR p rovided a substantial financial package totaling DOP 79.4 billion during the 
liquidation process, which included liquidity facilities, depositor payments, and the 
acquisition of loan portfolios. About 70% of the deposits were paid in cash, while the 
remainder was paid with securities  issued by the CBDR to sterilize the remainder and 
prevent further inflationary pressures. Additionally, Baninter’s certificates of deposit were 
exchanged for investment certificates issued by the CBDR, with maturities ranging f rom 90 
days to three years and at an interest rate of 14%. These investment certificates accumulated 
a total value of DOP 29 billion (Guzmán et al. 2005; World Bank 2004). 
Despite the CBDR’s attempts to contain Baninter’s liquidity issues, the contagion spread to 
two medium-sized banks, Bancrédito and Banco Mercantil, that had also been facing 
“management deficiencies” (IMF 2003, 1) . Bancrédito held assets and contingencies 
equivalent to 14.6% of the total market, while Mercantil held 6.2%. At the time, the CBDR 
had adopted a restrictive monetary stance to stabilize the foreign exchange market and 
moderate inflationary pressures. New measures included increasing the reserve 
requirement on new deposits from 10% to 15% for noncommercial bank f inancial entities 
and a plan to reduce the legal reserve ratio for commercial banks from 20% to 17%, although 
this idea was eventually abandoned, and the earlier 20% ratio was maintained. These stricter 
reserve requirements, along with continued deposit withdrawals  and further reports of 
fraud, exacerbated the liquidity shortages in the market. As a result, Bancrédito and 
Mercantil resorted to using the facilities that had been made avail able to Baninter  (CBDR 
2003c; Guzmán et al. 2005). 
Bancrédito’s resolution involved the transfer of assets and liabilities to Banco Profesional, 
another private banking institution, with assistance from the CBDR. This assistance 
amounted to approximately DOP 23.2 billion, primarily consisting of the acquisition of loans 
from related parties and other assets owned by Bancrédito’s owner (Guzmán et al. 2005). 
Similarly, Mercantil’s resolution involved the transfer of assets and liabilities to Republic 
Bank of Trinidad and Tobago (RBTT), another commercial bank, facilitated by the CBDR  in 
November 2003. As part of the negotiation for the transfer, RBTT committed to recapitalizing 
Mercantil and the CBDR agreed to providing for potential losses arising from impaired assets 
amounting to DOP 6.5 billion. In addition, the CBDR managed several assets of Mercantil, 
including commercial loans, promissory notes, and letters of guarantee, with a total value of 
DOP 4 billion. However, a report published by the Financial Department of the CBDR  at the 
time cautioned that only DOP 1 billion (approximately 17% of the total) would be recovered 
through emergency assistance programs  and that even that figure was deemed to be 
optimistic (Guzmán et al. 2005).  
As predicted, the overall disbursement associated with the measures provided by the CBDR 
to Baninter, Bancrédito, and Mercantil amounted to more than DOP 1 00 billion, which 
equaled approximately 2 0–25% of the Dominican Republic’s GDP in 2003. This figure 
685
Liquidity Facilities during the Dominican Republic Financial Crisis of 2003 Porfirio Martínez

--- Page 6 ---
ARCHIVE NOTE 
 
 
included payments to depositors, the acquisition of loan portfolios and other assets, and the 
liquidity facilities provided to the three banks. The majority (73 %) of  resources w ere 
allocated to Baninter. In response to the significant costs incurred during the crisis, Congress 
passed a law outlining a plan to recapitalize the CBDR. The package of measures involved the 
issuance of bonds by the state and the direct transfer of funds and contributions from the 
state to the CBDR (DR 2007; Guzmán et al. 2005).  
Liquidity Facilities 
The CBDR, as lender of last resort, structured the facilities to provide liquidity to commercial 
banks that were e xperiencing a decline in deposits and unable to meet their resource 
demands in the interbank market. To access this facility, banks were required to undergo an 
evaluation conducted by CBDR officials. This evaluation was based on the latest consolidated 
balance sheets of all entities related to the ba nk. Recipient banks also had to  meet the 
domestic solvency requirement, which mandated a capital adequacy ratio of at least 10% of 
risk-weighted assets. Additionally, they were expected to maintain the solvency condition 
throughout the duration of the facility. Furthermore, banks were prohibited from expanding 
their loan portfolios and participating in currency-related treasury operations related to the 
currency market. Finally, facility use required authorization from the CBDR’s Open Market 
Committee (Guzmán et al. 2005).  
The amount of liquidity advances and the loans provided through the discount window 
facilities depended on the bank’s capital and tot al deposits. Initially capped at 1 % of total 
deposits per bank , the CBDR temporarily raised the limit for these facilities as market 
conditions worsened. In September 2002, when the CBDR’s liquidity assistance to Baninter 
began, the limit of the facilities increased to 3%. In October, the CBDR temporarily increased 
the limit to 5 % in accordance with the resolution requirements ; it then provisioned for a 
final limit increase of up to 8% in December 2002 (Guzmán et al. 2005). 
Initially, the overall assistance received by a bank  from the CBDR could not exceed 30 % of 
its capital. This limit aimed to objectively restrict the commitment of public resources to the 
inefficient management of private banks. However, in October 2002, the CBDR increased the 
limit so that it could grant liquidity facilities up to 60% of an institution’s paid-in capital and 
reserves (and up to 100 %, if necessary). In November 2003, the government increased the 
upper limit again such that the CBDR could lend up to 1.5 times the Tier 1 capital if necessary. 
The amount of aid given to Baninter reached nearly four times the bank’s capital and 
reserves at the end of 2002, well in excess of the legal limit  of 1.5 times the bank’s capital 
and reserves (Guzmán et al. 2005). 
The rates for accessing these facilities, particularly loans from the discount window, were 
calculated based on the current average loan rate in the market, adding a penalty charge. 
Specifically, these rates were equivalent to the weighted average of the active interest rates 
of multiple banks plus a margin of 3 percentage points . Moreover, banks had the option to 
renew the loans up to three times, with each renewal incurring an additional 2 percentage 
686
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
ARCHIVE NOTE 
 
 
points to the rate. However, once this limit was reached, banks were unable to reuse the 
facility for the following six months (CBDR 2003a; Guzmán et al. 2005). 
Banks were required to submit collateral  (in the form of promissory notes)  equivalent to 
125% of the required loan amount. Loans could be collateralized by the following assets: (a) 
central bank deposits, other than required reserves; (b) securities issued by the CBDR and 
the Ministry of Finance;  (c) titles issued by the government, duly approved by the National 
Congress; and (d) loans rated A and B by the superintendent of banks, tied to a mortgage 
guarantee (CBDR 2003a; Guzmán et al. 2005). 
Impact on Monetary Policy Transmission 
The failure of these banks in the Dominican Republic during the 2003  financial crisis had a 
profound impact on the country’s economy and led to significant imbalances and a shift in 
the trajectory of economic growth. The primary objective of monetary policy was to tackle 
the imbalances that the crisis  caused. In the short term, the CBDR focused on increasing 
interest rates to moderate exchange rate pressures and collect the excess liquidity generated 
by liquidity advances and other facilities granted (IMF 2003). 
However, despite the CCBDR’s efforts to sterilize liquidity fr om the rescue operations, 
monetary issuance increased by 101.6% to DOP 77.5 million by the end of 2003. The overall 
economic slowdown and  sharp depreciation of the peso contributed to inflationary 
pressures. Inflation reached 42.7% by the end of 2003 (CBDR 2004; IMF 2003).  
In December 2003, the CBDR issued securities amounting to DOP 60 billion—placed through 
over-the-counter transactions, competitive auctions among institutional investors, and the 
exchange of Baninter deposits for CBDR investment certificates. These measures effectively 
demonetized approximately DOP 30 billion (CBDR 2003b; CBDR 2004). 
The CBDR also adopted a measure to exclude cash on hand when computing the 20 % legal 
reserve calculation, allowing for an increase in reserve deposits at commercial banks. This 
amounted to a  proportional increase in reserve requirements, which resulted in 26.5% of 
total liabilities being subject to reserve requirements by the end of 2003 . Additionally, due 
to the transparency of deposits and associated cleanup of banks’ credit portfolios,  the 
loan/deposit ratio fell from 97.5 % at the end of 20 02 to 78.7 % by the end of 2003  (CBDR 
2004).  
The banking crisis resulted in significant pressures on the Dominican peso, high inflation, 
and a substantial flight of capital to foreign markets. Economic activity deteriorated as 
consumer spending and investment declined. However, the crisis also prompted authorities 
to develop a comprehensive program aimed at strengthening the financial system. This 
package of measures focused on implementing stringent prudential regulation and 
instituting risk-based s upervision practices. Such structural changes were intended to 
strengthen the regulatory framework of the banking sector, ensuring financial stability and 
mitigating systemic risk (IMF 2003). 
687
Liquidity Facilities during the Dominican Republic Financial Crisis of 2003 Porfirio Martínez

--- Page 8 ---
ARCHIVE NOTE 
 
 
 
References and Key Program Documents 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance. 
(CBDR 2003a) Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (CBDR). 2003a. “Last Resort Lender 
Regulation.” December 18, 2003. 
Regulation explaining under what circumstances the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic 
will grant last resort loans (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4242 
(DR 2007) Government of the Dominican Republic (DR). 2007. Law No. 167-07 for the 
Recapitalization of the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic. July 13, 2007. 
Law establishing legal and financial mechanisms for the recapitalization of the Central Bank 
of the Dominican Republic (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4247 
Press Releases/Announcements. 
(IMF 2003) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2003. “Public Information Notice: IMF 
Concludes 2003 Article IV Consultation with the Dominican Republic.” Public Information 
Notice No. 03/123, October 14, 2003. 
Public information notice announcing the end of the IMF executive board’s Article IV 
consultation with the Dominican Republic. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4249 
Reports/Assessments. 
(CBDR 2003b) Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (CBDR). 2003b. “First Resolution 
Dated July 7, 2003, Which Revokes and Dissolves the Operations of Banco Intercontinental, 
SA.” April 9, 2003. 
Resolution issued by the Monetary Board revoking and dissolving Baninter’s operations (in 
Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4241 
(CBDR 2003c) Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (CBDR). 2003c. “Report on the 
Dominican Economy, January–March 2003.” June 2003. 
Report describing the Dominican Republic economy in March 2003 (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4244 
(CBDR 2004) Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (CBDR). 2004. “Supplement - Report 
on the Dominican Economy, January–December 2003.” March 2004. 
Annexed tables of a March 2004 report describing the Dominican Republic economy as of 
December 2003 (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4245 
688
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
ARCHIVE NOTE 
 
 
  
689
Liquidity Facilities during the Dominican Republic Financial Crisis of 2003 Porfirio Martínez

--- Page 10 ---
ARCHIVE NOTE 
 
 
(Guzmán et al. 2005) Guzmán, Jose Florencio, Ernesto Livacic, Claudio Mauch, and Miguel A. 
Ortiz. 2005. “Report of the International Expert Panel: Crisis Dominican Banking, Revised 
Version.” March 2005. 
Report proposing measures to strengthen and modernize the financial system of the 
Dominican Republic (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4246 
(CBDR n.d.) Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (CBDR). n.d. “Monetary Board of the 
Central Bank of the Dominican Republic.” Accessed November 2, 2023. 
Webpage describing the role of the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of the Dominican 
Republic (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4248 
(World Bank 2004) World Bank. 2004. “Progress Report of the Country Assistance Strategy 
from the World Bank Group for the Dominican Republic,” Memorandum to the President of 
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Executive Directors of 
the International Finance Corporation, February 3, 2004. 
Report from the World Bank for the Dominican Republic addressing the deterioration in its 
economic performance (in Spanish). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4250 
 
Copyright 2025 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to 
receive permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on 
Financial Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
690
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1