--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 4 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Paul Tucker Lessons Learned: Paul Tucker 
Salil Gupta 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Finance Commons, Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation 
Commons, and the Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Gupta, Salil (2025) "Lessons Learned: Paul Tucker," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 4, 34-37. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1675 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss4/4 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss4/4

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Paul Tucker 
By Salil Gupta 
After joining the Bank of England (BoE) in 1980, Sir Paul Tucker held a number of positions of 
increasing responsibility including serving as a member of several key committees. Tucker 
played a crucial role  in the BoE’s response to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) as director for 
markets, through March 2009, then as deputy governor of the bank until November 2013. Post-
crisis, he has been instrumental in  constructing the international regulatory framework on 
financial stability. From 2016 to 2021, Tucker also chaired the Systemic Risk Council.  
Currently, Tucker is a research fellow at Harvard Kennedy School, Mossavar-Rahmani Center 
for Business and Government, a senior fellow at Harvard’s Center for European Studies, 
president of the U nited Kingdom’s National Institute for Economic and Social  Research, and 
member of the advisory board of the Yale Program on Financial Stability. This Lessons Learned 
is based on an interview held in April 2025; the full transcript may be found here. 
Regulators should seek to improve the governance of systemic financial institutions  
because this issue, which is often overlooked, can have significant impacts on systemic 
risk and crisis preparation.  
Since the GFC, related Tucker, the largest systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) 
have been regulated with capital and liquidity requirements determined globally by central 
banks and multilateral institutions, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS). But, he continued, t here has been limited introspection by 
policymakers on crisis preparedness and governance reform. More is needed.  
The disorderly failure of a massive financial institution , said Tucker,  can have lasting 
debilitating impacts on the growth potential of the global economy, as evidenced by the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008. Tucker also pointed to the 2023 failure of Credit Suisse 
as an incident that highlighted the risks when important governance issues are overlooked.  
They [the Swiss authorities] were certainly inadequately prepared in terms of a 
lender-of-last-resort [LOLR] regime and much else, including resolution.  
The Swiss central bank was ready to lend only against local mortga ge collateral, but 
the run was not only in the local retail bank but also in the large private bank. All the 
subsidiaries carried the name Credit Suisse. So, a run on one legal entity becomes a 
run on all [related] legal entities.  
One thing to hold onto in this field is the importance of common sense. The common 
sense in the Credit Suisse [CS] case is that God did not design the world so that any 
run on Credit Suisse would be confined to the domestic mortgage bank. That there 
was no LOLR backup for the wider CS group could have been spotted years before. 
34

--- Page 4 ---
According to Tucker, the potential for the failure of a SIFI and its broad impacts should 
motivate policymakers to improve the management of SIFI boards. He advocates for 
policymakers to spend more time contemplating this issue as it relates to systemic risk, since 
currently, boards are considered the first line of defense.  
Policymakers should place a very high weight on well -functioning boards of these 
institutions, since society , or at least the people’s representatives , have a very low 
appetite for them failing, and the political costs of rescuing them are high . I am very 
doubtful they could be confident about that at present, and the answer lies in carefully 
constructed incentives, not more and more rules. 
When a SIFI fails, the credibility of both the executive of the failed institution and the 
regulator begin s to unravel , Tucker  noted. He suggested that central banks and other 
regulators exercise contractual or conditional powers that are part of their supervisory 
process to incentivize governance reform at SIFIs.  
Regulators should consider establish ing uniform global standards and other reforms that 
would improve the governance of SIFIs and crisis preparation. One suggestion  from Tucker 
is for SIFI board members to serve a fixed term of more than one year , unlike the CS board 
members, who were re-elected every year . Another is for the central bank to approve the 
chair, nonexecutive chair, and chair of the risk committee , as is done in the UK . Either way, 
Tucker cautioned, the central bank should not meet the board of a SIFI for the first time when 
the financial institution is in crisis. 
Liquidity management by central banks has improved since the GFC, but further 
progress and clarity is needed, especially to address persistent stigma concerns.  
Central banks have developed standing facilities and emergency facilities to provide liquidity 
to SIFIs during financial stress. If using these facilities is perceived as stigmatizing, they may 
not be utilized as intended explained Tucker.  
This problem is more pervasive in the U nited States, said Tucker . “On an ordinal scale, the 
stigma problem in the US is probably worse than elsewhere. On a cardinal scale, the problem 
is considerably worse in the US than elsewhere.” One reason for this, Tucker said is “that the 
Fed, and particularly the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, has developed a reputation . . . 
of being prepared to lend to anybody in difficulty . . . to help stave off systemic distress. ” 
However, Tucker noted that “a central banker cannot provide a 100% guarantee of providing 
liquidity.”  
But stigma is not just a US problem. The UK has also suffered from this issue.  Tucker 
described the situation and cure: 
Previously, the BoE had only one liquidity facility, and no formal discount window in 
the sense of lending against a wide class of collateral. It had only a facility for 
providing liquidit y against UK government bonds to absorb any glitches in the 
payment system and to stabilize or align the overnight rate in the money markets 
with the policy rate.  
35
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
In the early weeks of the 2007 phase of the crisis, all hell let lose whenever a bank in 
the UK utilized this overnight facility, even when it was for frictional reasons. So, in 
2008, we moved to having two instruments, one for each of two public policy 
purposes. I think this separation helps with stigma.  
The overnight facility provides liquidity against super high quality collateral, and the 
discount window facility is against broader collateral. It is kind of a two-step process 
analytically. We can insulate the overnight frictional facility from stigma or moral 
hazard concerns, which he lps to focus on curing the stigma concerns with the 
discount window facility. 
Overall, more clarity is needed by more central banks regarding liquidity facilities, advised 
Tucker. The stigma problem,  although obviously distinct, blurs into the moral hazard  
problem in terms of solutions. Mitigating both, whether through separating facilities or other 
measures,  requires a clear, carefully crafted regime that should comply with principles that 
can be defended in public to the citizenry, or in the legislative body. Those principles would 
not only constrain the central bank but also give it consistent objectives.  
Tucker also strongly believes that central banks should not provide emergency liquidity to a 
financial institution that is “fundamentally bust.” However, he recommend ed a common-
sense approach be applied rather than asking policymakers to apply a fixed objective 
standard; he also recommended  that they recognize that at some point in the decision 
process, the fiscal government needs  to be involved. Furthermore, h e stressed that it is  
important for top central bankers from various countries to discuss—and reach a consensus 
on—the lender-of-last-resort capabilities and regimes. 
Finally, Tucker suggested that central bankers bring liquidity and resolution to the forefront 
during financial peacetime. Central bankers spend considerably more time on monetary 
policy decisions than they do on preparing for a crisis at SIFIs. More frequent speeches and 
documents on emergency powers of central banks will present a coherent roadmap to the 
public and banking industry, and force regulators to ruminate on the topic.  Tucker 
analogized the benefits of such increased communications to those revealed by increased 
communication regarding monetary policy: 
Top central bankers frequently make speeches about monetary policy but very rarely 
make speeches about LOLR. There are some perverse incentives here. With monetary 
policy decisions, unlike with new regulatory measures, central bankers get to have a 
go every eight weeks or so. Therefore, very  few monetary policy decisions are in 
themselves of massive importance. What matters are the signals about your 
underlying reaction function.  
By contrast, lender-of-last-resort operations and the resolution of banks are rare, big 
tasks, and are often the single most important moment in the professional lives—and 
lasting reputations—of top central bankers. And yet, they do not really spend time 
discussing these capabilities and functions in public.  
36
Lessons Learned: Paul Tucker Gupta

--- Page 6 ---
There are two benefits of such public speeches about LOLR. One, they can be used to 
convey your regimes to the public and the industry. . . Second, having to speak about 
it in public forces one to think about it in private. . . . 
It is much better to do so during financial peacetime than for the first time in the midst 
of crisis. During a crisis, market participants and the public hang on to every word or 
pause in a central banker’s speech because it is of immediate relevance. During 
financial peacetime, an institution has more intellectual, emotional, and psychological 
space to think about these things in a rational, cold, and realistic manner.  
Tucker also offered an additional vital reason for talking about th ese issues in advance of a 
crisis:   
For the g eneration of central bankers that brought me up, it was not necessary to 
clarify these important details in public. But during my time, and certainly today, 
circumstances demand clarity in the regime. That is partly for democratic legitimacy, 
but it also p romotes comprehension and efficiency in markets. Also, as central 
bankers discovered first by publishing the monetary regime, transparency about the 
regime makes one think more carefully, producing better answers. Central bankers 
need to take that to LOLR and other liquidity insurance policies and practices. 
Dated:  December 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2025–05 
37
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 4