--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Ireland: Anglo Irish Bank Emergency Liquidity Assistance, 2009 Ireland: Anglo Irish Bank Emergency Liquidity Assistance, 2009 
Salil Gupta 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Mahdi Khairallah 
Master’s in Business Administration, Yale School of Management 
Nik Adlina Nik Moktar 
Master’s Degree in Systemic Risk, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Gupta, Salil; Khairallah, Mahdi; and Nik Moktar, Nik Adlina (2025) "Ireland: Anglo Irish Bank Emergency 
Liquidity Assistance, 2009," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 260-293. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1621 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/11 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/11

--- Page 3 ---
Ireland: Anglo Irish Bank Emergency Liquidity 
Assistance, 20091 
Salil Gupta,2 Mahdi Khairallah,3 and Nik Adlina Nik Mokhtar4 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
April 15, 2025 
Abstract 
At the height of the Global Financial Crisis in September 2008, Anglo Irish Bank (Anglo), one 
of Ireland’s six core banks,  specializing in commercial and residential real estate  with EUR 
101.3 billion in assets, faced severe losses. Irish authorities announced a blanket deposit and 
liability guarantee for the six banks including Anglo. At the same time, Anglo was offered 
standby liquidity facilities of EUR 3 billion from the Central Bank of Ireland (CBI) and EUR 
10 billion from the two largest Irish commercial banks, which were not drawn on at the time. 
Anglo was nationalized in January 2009, as deposit outflows and losses persisted. By March 
2009, Anglo had accessed emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) of EUR 23.5 billion from the 
CBI, against collateral that did not qualify for Eurosystem monetary operations. The Irish 
government provided Anglo an initial capital injection of EUR 4 billion in May 2009. In 2010, 
the government provided to Anglo an additional EUR 25.3 billion of capital in four tranches 
of fixed-rate promissory notes (PNs)—liabilities of the government—which could be further 
provided to the CBI as collateral to access the ELA facility. By the end of 2010, Anglo’s use of 
the ELA grew to EUR 28.1 billion. Between 2010 and 2011, Anglo’s ELA borrowings were 
increasingly secured by only a government guarantee . In July 2011, Anglo merged with an 
Irish housing bank, or building society, to form Irish Bank Resolution Corporation (IBRC). 
The CBI’s emergency lending facility to Anglo ended with the liquidation of IBRC in February 
2013. At the liquidation , the CBI took ownership of the PNs and other government 
obligations from Anglo. The Irish government exchanged the outstanding PNs with the CBI 
for marketable floating -rate sov ereign notes  worth at least  EUR 40 billion . This helped 
reduce the Department of Finance’s  interest costs and allow ed the CBI to manage the 
monetary impact of the repayment of the Irish state’s debts over time.  
Keywords: Anglo Irish Bank, crisis management, emergency liquidity assistance, Ireland  
 
1 This case study is part of a Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering ad hoc emergency liquidity provision. A survey of all the cases in this series (Kelly et al. 
2025) and the individual cases underlying it are available from the Journal of Financial Crises  at 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/. Wiggins et al. (2022) surveys broad-
based emergency liquidity programs. 
2 Senior Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management.  
3 Master’s in Business Administration, Yale School of Management.  
4 Master’s Degree in Systemic Risk, Yale School of Management.  
The authors wish to thank Patrick Honohan, former governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, and Greg Feldberg, 
Director of Research , YPFS, Yale School of Management, for their help with this case study. 
260

--- Page 4 ---
Overview 
This case study  describes the ad hoc 
emergency liquidity assistance the Central 
Bank of Ireland (CBI) provided to Anglo Irish 
Bank (Anglo) during the Global Financial 
Crisis (GFC). 
As of September 30, 2008, Anglo was one of 
the six core banks in Ireland , with a balance 
sheet of EUR 101.3 billion (USD 142.7 
billion).5 In 2009, Anglo represented more 
than 50% of Ir eland’s GDP (Anglo 2009; EC 
2009). Anglo accounted for a significant 
share of customer deposits in Ireland and 
provided loans to the retail, office, leisure, 
healthcare, and tourism sectors. Anglo could 
be charact erized as a “monoline” bank, 
focusing on commercial and real estate 
lending to the three core markets of Ireland, 
the United Kingdom, and the United States 
(EC 2009, 2).  
Because Anglo’s growth stemmed from 
lending to the property development sector, 
the b ank started to face severe financial 
losses and capital deterioration subsequent 
to the marked decline in the Irish property 
market. Anglo’s short-term liquidity ratios 
also highlighted that the bank did not expect 
to have sufficient funds to pay deposit 
withdrawals (Tynan 2020). 
On September 29, 2008, Ireland announced 
a broad -based guarantee program  that 
covered EUR 400 billion in deposits and 
selected other liabilities of six Irish banks, 
including Anglo (for details, see Schaefer-
Brown [2022]). Anglo was also allowed 
access to special liquidity facilities of EUR 3 
billion from the CBI and EUR 10 billion from 
the two largest commercial banks, Bank of 
Ireland (BOI) and Allied Irish Bank  (AIB). 
Anglo d id not draw on these facilities , as 
 
5 According to Yahoo Finance, USD 1 = EUR 0.71 on September 30, 2008. 
Key Terms 
Purpose: to help the CBI and ECB gain time to 
formulate a rescue plan for the bank 
Announcement 
Date 
No specific announcement on 
the ELA granted 
Operational Date September 30, 2008 
Termination Date February 7, 2013  
Legal Authority Section 5 B(d) of the Central 
Bank Act, 1942 
Administrator Central Bank of Ireland 
Peak Authorization Not disclosed 
Peak Outstanding At least EUR 40 billion 
Collateral Customer loans, government 
PNs, NAMA bonds, 
government guarantees 
Haircut and 
Recourse 
Applied haircuts but no 
public information on the 
details 
Interest Rate and 
Fees 
Eurosystem’s Marginal 
Lending Facility rate plus 
100 basis points  
Term No public information. 
Facility Deed’s initial term 
was one month, but it was 
later extended to 18 months 
Part of a Package Other key assistances 
granted: guarantee, asset 
acquisition, nationalization 
and capital injection 
Outcomes Exit of ELA through collateral 
exchange transactions 
Notable Features The Irish government’s 
assistance to Anglo was 
largely provided after 
nationalization; Ireland 
issued PNs to recapitalize 
Anglo; 
(continued) 
261
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
deposits briefly recovered following the 
announcement of the government guarantee 
(Honohan 2010).  
Nonetheless, Anglo continued to experience 
funding outflows toward the end of the year 
owing to concerns about growing credit 
losses and corporate governance (EC 2009). 
Anglo was not able to  fully recoup the vast 
amounts of deposits that depositors had withdrawn prior to the government’s guarantee 
announcement (Nyberg 2011) . In December, the Irish government proposed a capital 
injection of EUR 1.5 billion into Anglo  by issuing preference shares  (Baudino, Murphy, and 
Svoronos 2020; EC 2009) . In January 2009, Anglo was na tionalized6—taken under 
government ownership and control —under the Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act, and the 
Irish government decided to defer the previously announced capital injection at that time 
(EC 2009). The minister for finance, in consultation with the CBI and the financial regulator,7 
declared that Anglo was solvent  and would continue to operate on a going-concern basis 
with government support as required (CBI 2009).  
Following Anglo’s nationalization, Anglo continued to face a challenging funding market with 
a decline in deposits from nonretail customers and market counterparts (EC 2009). In March 
2009, t he CBI agreed to provide the bank with EUR 11.5 billion in emergency liquidity 
assistance (ELA) against collateral that did n ot qualify for standard Eurosystem monetary 
operations (Whelan 2012). By the end of the month, Anglo’s total borrowing from from the 
CBI and ECB had grown to EUR 23.5 billion (see Figure 1) (EC 2009). 
Figure 1: Anglo’s Key Metrics between 2008 and 2009 (EUR billions) 
Note: The figures for 2009 were estimated by Anglo and do not account for the Irish state’s investment. 
Sources: Anglo 2010; EC 2009. 
At the end of May, 2009, Anglo Irish  released it s 2009 interim report for the six months 
through March 31, 2009 . Its new management had determined that impaired loans had 
increased almost tenfold, to EUR 10.7 billion (see Figure 1). Anglo’s borrowing from central 
 
6 According to Ireland’s Department of Finance, the decision to nationalize Anglo was made to mitigate the risks 
of a ratings downgrade, to recoup market certainty, to stem deposit outflows, to allow for an orderly resolution 
of the loan book, and to maintain direct ministerial control over the bank’s governance issues (Nyberg 2011). 
7 Ireland’s financial regulator was the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority (IFSRA), a separately 
governed entity within the CBI, which was responsible for bank supervision and consumer protection 
(Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). 
Notable Features 
(continued) 
these PNs  were used as 
collateral for the ELA and 
effectively transferred risk 
from the CBI to the 
government; ELA was 
increasingly depended on 
government guarantees 
rather than collateral over 
four years  
 September 2008 March 2009 
Impaired Loans 0.9 10.7 
Borrowing from Central Banks 7.6 23.5 
Core Tier 1 Capital (4% regulatory minimum) 5.9% 1.4% 
Total Capital (8% regulatory minimum)  12% 8.2% 
262
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 6 ---
banks, including the European Central Bank (ECB) and CBI, had increased to EUR 23.5 billion 
(or 9.9% of Ireland’s 2009 GDP) in March 2009, from EUR 7.6 billion in September 2008. Its 
core Tier 1 capital was 1.4%, below the 4% regulatory minimum, which would trigger the 
need for a restructuring of the business under the Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act 
of 2008. Anglo’s interim report  indicated concerns that the bank’s solvency ratios were 
expected to fall further by September 2009.  On May 28, 2009, to  avoid an immediate 
restructuring, the financial regulator  allowed Anglo to temporarily suspend capit al 
requirements for one month, with the expectation of a capital injection by the  government 
(EC 2009).  
Starting in May 2009, Irish authorities provided a capital injection of EUR 4 billion in cash to 
Anglo in return for newly issued common shares, which the EC declared as necessary toward 
“restoring market confidence in the Irish financial sector ” (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 
2020; EC 2009, 1, 13) . The state’s capital injection was carried out as a “temporary urgent 
relief” to allow time to begin restructuring the bank to restore long term viability, or to move 
toward a potential liquidation (EC 2009, 14) . Ireland committed to notifying the EC about 
Anglo’s final restructuring plan by Nove mber 2009 (EC 2009). Capital injections into other 
Irish banks, including AIB and BOI, were made from the National Pensions Reserve Fund 
Commission (NPRFC), on behalf of the Department of Finance  (DoF). In contrast, Irish 
authorities provided Anglo’s capital injection from the Exchequer,  since authorities believed 
that these funds were unlikely to be recovered (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020, FN 
40). This was indicative of the high level of distress at Anglo (EC 2009). 
Following the nationalization and the initial government capital injection, Anglo’s deposit 
outflows and losses continued throughout 2009 and 2010. To meet its liquidity demands, 
Anglo’s emergency liquidity borrowings grew from EUR 10 billion in February 2009 to EUR 
28.1 billion by the end of December 2010.  The ELA ceiling was regularly subject to 
nonobjection from the ECB’s Governing Council (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). 
Anglo had insufficient ECB-eligible collateral to back these borrowings and would have had 
negative equity capital of EUR 26 billion by the end of 2010,  had it not been for the capital 
injection already made in 2009 and further capital injections from the government  in 2010 
(Tynan 2020). The DoF addressed both liquidity and solvency problems in 2010 by acquiring 
an additional EUR 25.3 billion in new ordinary shares in Anglo in four tranches between 
March and December  (Anglo 2011). To pay for these shares, the DoF issued a promissory 
note (PN) that Anglo could hold as an asset and post with the central bank as collateral for 
further draws on ELA (see Key Design Decision No.  7, Source and Size of Funding) (Anglo 
2011; Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020).   
It is relevant to note that, in the week s before the Irish government applied for an 
international financial assistance program from the EU and the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) in late 2010, all the other five domestically controlled Irish banks also had recourse to 
ELA as they suffered fun ding runs. In March 2011, as part of the conditions of the EU -IMF 
program, the remaining deposit liabilities of Anglo, and of another, smaller banking entity 
263
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
Irish Nationwide Building Society (INBS )8, along with assets (that were eligible for ECB 
borrowings), were sold to other Irish banks. These transactions had the effect of 
concentrating all of the ELA of the Irish banking system into the two entities that were being 
wound down, namely Anglo and INBS (Government of Ireland 2022; Honohan 2019). 
In July 2011, Anglo was merged with INBS to form a new entity called Irish Bank Resolution 
Corporation (IBRC) (Tynan 2020). At the end of 2011, IBRC’s ELA borrowings had declined 
from an earlier peak, to stand at EUR 40 billion, where they remained  into 2013 (Baudino, 
Murphy, and Svoronos 2020; CBI 2012). Ireland’s new Labour government, formed in 2011, 
wanted to replace PNs with longer-term, more affordable financing (MerrionStreet 2013b). 
PNs were described as an “onerous and unfair legacy of the banking cri sis,” with a lifetime 
cost to the Irish taxpayer of EUR 48 billion  (MerrionStreet 2013b, 1) . The Irish Taoiseach 
(prime minister) described Anglo as “stains on our international reputations and dents to 
our national pride” (MerrionStreet 2013b, 1). In 2013, the Irish government announced the 
unwinding of PNs in the liquidation of IBRC (MerrionStreet 2013a). 
On February 7, 2013, the IBRC was liquidated after a special legislation which allowed Irish 
authorities to repay the CBI’s PNs through the proceeds of long -duration sovereign - and 
government-guaranteed bonds in a collateral exchange transaction  (Baudino, Murphy, and 
Svoronos 2020). Anglo’s ELA borrowings involved a varying combination of three different 
ELA contractual arrangements: (1) Master Loan Repurchase Agreement (MLRA), (2) Special 
Master Repurchase Agreement (SMRA), and (3) Facility Deed (See Key Design Decision No. 
7, Source and Size of Funding). At first, the MLRA was used and collateral provided in the 
form of banking assets. Later, the majority of the funds provided to Anglo were through the 
SMRA, including by means of the sale and repurchase of PNs (Anglo 2011). The Facility Deed 
was a loan guaranteed by the Irish government but otherwise unsecured. The ELA was also 
eventually secured by a floating charge on the assets of Anglo (IBRC 2014). 
At the time of its liquidation in February 2013, IBRC had roughly EUR 25 billion outstanding 
under the SMRA and EUR 15 billion outstanding under the Facility Deed (Houses of the 
Oireachtas 2013) . The liquidation of IBRC on February 7, 2013 under special le gislation 
triggered action by the CBI to replace the (nontransferable) PNs and Facility Deed, which it 
acquired as a result of the liquidation, with transferable securities (IBRC 2014). The PNs and 
the associated SMRA obligation to the CBI were replaced with long-duration, nonamortising, 
floating-rate sovereign bonds  that the CBI could sell over time . The Irish sovereign bonds 
had an average maturity of 34 to 35 years, compared with the PN with an average maturity 
of seven to eight years. I n practice, the floating-rate notes were disposed of well before 
maturity, as agreed to by the CBI with the ECB (Government of Ireland 2022). 
The CBI sold the Facility Deed and the rights under the floating charge to the National Asset 
Management Association (NAMA), a government agency created in 2009 to take over and 
sell troubled assets, in exchange for new government-guaranteed NAMA bonds (Baudino, 
Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). NAMA created a special purpose vehicle called National Asset 
 
8 The Irish government provided INBS a capital injection of EUR 100 million in 2010 (Government of Ireland 
2022). 
264
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 8 ---
Resolution Limited (NARL) to claim the se rights over IBRC’s assets and  the floating-rate 
notes under the Facility Deed.  NARL issued the new NAMA bonds to the CBI in an amount 
equivalent to the  amount outstanding from the Facility Deed (IBRC 2014) . These 
transactions were conducted at market value; they had the effect of deferring and reducing 
the net costs to the Exchequer and allowed the CBI to contain the risks to financial stability  
(see Figure 2) (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020; Houses of the Oireachtas 2013). This 
move also led to a EUR 20 billion reduction in projected borrowings for National Treasury 
Management Agency  (NTMA), which greatly reduced the debt servicing costs to the Irish 
economy (MerrionStreet 2013b).  
Figure 2: Timeline for Anglo Irish Bank’s Emergency Liquidity Assistance 
Date Event  
September 2008 The Irish government announces the Irish b lanket guarantee covering  liabilities worth 
EUR 400 billion for six domestic banks including Anglo   
September 30, 2008 Anglo is provided standby liquidity facilities of EUR 3 billion from the CBI and EUR 5 billion 
from Ireland’s two largest commercial banks 
December 21, 2008 Irish government announces a proposed capital injection of EUR 1.5 billion to Anglo 
January 15, 2009 Irish government announces nationalization of Anglo and does not provide the previously 
announced capital injection of EUR 1.5 billion  
March 31, 2009 Anglo’s borrowing from central banks , both CBI and ECB,  increases to EUR 23.5 billion 
from EUR 7.6 billion in September 2008 
March 2009 CBI provides emergency liquidity of EUR 11.5 billion to Anglo ; the collateral provided to 
the CBI did not qualify for Eurosystem monetary operations 
May 29, 2009 Irish government announces that it will provide EUR 4 billion to Anglo as per a bank 
recapitalization program 
June 15, 2009 Irish authorities formally notify the EC about the capital injection to Anglo  
October 2009 All six Irish banks, including Anglo, are asked by the CBI to submit a three -year business 
and recovery plan; Anglo seems to be nonviable  
November 2009 NAMA is created to acquire distressed loans from Irish credit institutions covered by the 
blanket guarantee  
March 30, 2010 Irish government recapitalizes Anglo through issuance of PNs valued at EUR 8.3 billion 
and involving equal annual payments over more than 10 years. Subsequent revisions 
mean that the last PN s payment is not due until 2031. Interest rates on successive 
tranches of PN s increase to more than 8%. CBI’s prudential capital assessment review 
shows a capital gap of EUR 10.9 billion at three other large banks  
May 28, 2010 PNs issued to Anglo are increased by EUR 2 billion  
August 23, 2010 PNs issued to Anglo increased by EUR 8.58 billion  
October 15, 2010 Letter of the ECB president to the Irish minister for finance cautions against the use of 
ELA as a long -term solution. The letter  also notes that to consider further liquidity 
provision, the ECB governing council will take into account progress the Irish government 
undertakes in implementing structural reforms and banking sector restructuring  
265
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
November 19, 2010 Letter from the ECB president to the Irish minister for finance explicitly conditioning the 
continued provision of ELA to Irish banks on the Irish government’s move to consolidate 
its finances and introduce structural and financial sector restructuring    
December 31, 2010 PNs issued into Anglo increased by EUR 6.42 billion 
February 24, 2011 The m ajority of deposits of Anglo and INBS are transferred to AIB and Irish Life & 
Permanent respectively 
July 1, 2011 Anglo and INBS, which were both being wound down owing to large losses in the property 
sector, are merged to become IBRC 
December 2011 IBRC’s ELA borrowings stand at EUR 40 billion and Eurosystem borrowings at EUR 2 billion 
February 7, 2013 IBRC is liquidated and CBI recovers its ELA dues over time through the sale and maturity 
of assets acquired in special liquidation through collateral exchange transactions 
Sources: Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020; authors’ analysis. 
Summary Evaluation 
Researchers have noted the  extended period of time over which the ECB and CBI had 
provided ELA to Anglo, which deviated from the tool’s use as a temporary liquidity measure 
to tide over a going-concern bank or to facilitate the resolution or liquidation of a nonviable 
bank (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020; Eichengreen 2015). While implicitly criticizing 
the extent to which Anglo became reliant upon emergency liquidity for most of its funding  
after nationalization, Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos (2020, 5, 41) remark that “ELA is only 
one component of a wider crisis management framework, has a limited role and it is not 
meant to replace or delay the implementation of other measur es.” Central banks accounted 
for 70% of Anglo’s total funding in 2010 and 87% of the newly merged IBRC’s total funding 
in 2011 (Anglo 2011). While the CBI’s ELA was meant to buy time, the CBI and ECB found 
themselves “locked into” a liquidity arrangement , owing to the absence of other solutions,  
that lasted almost four years to allow for a restructuring and wind down of IBRC (Baudino, 
Murphy, and Svoronos 2020, 29) . The Irish government had effectively guaranteed the 
liabilities of Anglo and would not have  been able to meet the liabilities in cash without 
causing financial stability concerns, given the country’s loss of access to financial markets in 
2010.  
In his 2010 evaluation, the new CBI governor, Patrick Honohan , noted that the initial 
consensus amo ng officials back in September 2008 was that the problems at Irish banks 
were about liquidity rather than solvency (Honohan 2010).  
Professor Barry Eichengreen , in a paper presented at  the International Monetary Fund’s  
(IMF) Conference on Ireland , noted that  the Irish policymakers in September 2008 were 
“operating under a severe asymmetry of information ,” which adversely affected the ability 
to respond adequately to market pressures, or distinguish between insolvency and illiquidity 
(Eichengreen 2015, 115). Eichengreen further stated that Irish authorities did not challenge 
the assurances made by Anglo’s management that the bank only faced liquidity problems. He 
suggested that the Irish authorities should have , before nationalization, split Anglo into a  
good bank to secure depositors, and a bad bank to ascribe losses to unsecured creditors 
266
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 10 ---
under liquidation. The paper emphasized the need to distinguish between insolvency and 
illiquidity to be able to effectively respond to crises (Eichengreen 2015). 
Eichengreen also criticized the EU’s role in managing the crisis. He noted that Irish 
authorities did not receive wise counsel from the ECB before providing a blanket guarantee. 
He also criticized the ECB for pressuring Ireland to request a troika  (EC, ECB, and IMF)  
program in 2010, to refrain from haircutting senior unsecured bondholders, and to sell bank 
assets at a quicker pace than the CBI thought appropriate (Eichengreen 2015). 
Researchers at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) noted that upfront recognition 
of the fiscal implications of any liquidity support granted to the banks may help avoid the 
emergence of a damaging sovereign -bank loop that can be  extremely difficult to exit, 
especially without external support. Like Eichengreen, they argued that the availability of a 
bank resolution framework in September 2008 would have allowed the ELA to be more 
effective and serve its original purpose as a liquidity bridge (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 
2020). 
The Anglo case also raises the qu estion whether central banks should use emergency 
liquidity facilities for failed banks. The BIS researchers argued that ELA “is generally 
understood as being reserved for going -concern banks experiencing temporary liquidity 
issues” (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020, 41). However, it isn’t uncommon for central 
banks to use temporary ELA to facilitate the restructuring or liquidation of insolvent banks. 
The Anglo case is unusual because the ELA was ultimately extended for four years while the 
government delayed the decision to liquidate the bank.   
Researchers also noted the need for careful calibration of emergency liquidity facilit ies to 
ensure that the incentives are in place for a timely exit from an ad hoc facility. In Anglo’s case, 
a novel solution involving a collateral exchange was required for the ELA to end and for the 
CBI to be repaid (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020).   
Researchers criticized the use of government PNs to recapitalize the bank while accessing 
central bank liquidity. The same BIS report argued that recapitalizing banks with 
nonmarketable securities  might have a more limited impact on market confidence than a 
recapitalization involving cash or marketable securities , and may only delay the eventual 
fiscal costs associated with fixing the troubled banks. The issuance of term funding by the 
central bank effectively subsidizes the banking system, while ascribing sig nificant risks to 
the central bank balance sheet. The BIS report acknowledged that Ireland had limited fiscal 
capacity or market access for its debt during the crisis; still, the BIS report argued that it 
would have been better to base the PNs on market te rms and at market rates  (Baudino, 
Murphy, and Svoronos 2020).     
As part of a Joint Parliamentary Inquiry into Ireland’s crisis , it was disclosed that Irish 
authorities had in 2008 and 2009 relied on a loan book analysis performed by 
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) to assess the solvency of six Irish banks, and  that Anglo was 
audited by Ernst & Young before 2008. Brian Cowen, former Taoiseach and minister for 
finance, noted that the review performed by PwC was “hopelessly optimistic” since “in a very 
267
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
turbulent market situation, it is difficult to know what’s illiquid and what’s insolvent ;” he 
could not recall  any explicit discussion about the insolvency of any bank  (Houses of the 
Oireachtas 2016, 262). Baudino et al. (2020) states that although Anglo was nationalized in 
January 2009, the separation between viable and nonviable banks was only made  by Irish 
authorities in October 2009 , when all six Irish banks were asked to submit three -year 
recovery plans. It was increasingly clear by that time that Anglo would be nonviable.  
Governor Honohan, in his  2010 report on the Irish crisis , highlighted the  choices faced by 
previous policymakers in 2008 that “either Anglo’s disorderly bankruptcy had to be avoided, 
or protective measures taken for th e rest of the system, or —as was decided —both” 
(Honohan 2010, 132) . H onohan also suggested an ex post alternative rescue operation of 
closing Anglo and limiting the guarantee to Irish banks other than Anglo. He notes that such 
a decision would not have been  risk-free, with the potential of creating additional 
debilitating spillover effects at the time on other EU countries (Honohan 2010) . The  
researchers at the BIS  concluded that both the Anglo case and the  overall Irish experience 
demonstrated the importance of intrusive supervisory oversight, of contingency planning 
for crisis periods, and of the need to collect  and use reliable data on banks to calibrate an 
appropriate response to banking crises (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). 
The IMF’s report in 2022 indicated that the CBI and the DoF were working together to 
develop interagency protocols, including an incident response protocol, to use early 
intervention powers or to determine if a bank was likely to fail. The IMF recommended that 
the CBI develop policies and procedures for assessing the solvency of a bank that may be 
entering resolution to determine potential emergency liquidity assistance facilities. It was 
noted that the adoption of the Bank Resolution a nd Restructuring Directive (BRRD) in 
Ireland in 2015 had helped provide complementary resolution powers to Irish authorities.  
The CBI and DoF also agreed to a Recovery and Resolution (R&R) Engagement Framework 
to enhance cooperation in the event of a bank failure. The Eurosystem set out new rules in 
2020 on notifications between the ECB and national central banks on ELA. The national 
central banks retain the ability to provide emergency liquidity, with some objection from the 
ECB, if national central banks solely bear the risk of loss (IMF 2022).  
268
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 12 ---
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Deposit Insurance Dataset; World Bank Global Financial Development Database.  
 
 
  
269
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: Anglo received ELA from the CBI as a systemically important bank to 
ensure financial stability. Broadly, ELA required collateral acceptable to the CBI 
and the bank’s solvency. 
Emergency liquidity assistance (sometimes referred to by the CBI as “exceptional liquidity 
assistance”) can be u sed by a Eurosystem national central ban k, such as the CBI , to assist 
solvent financial institution  that do not have collateral eligible for normal E urosystem 
monetary policy operations  (ECB 2013). This ELA is distinct from the funding operations 
carried out for monetary policy implementation through the ECB (CBI 2011). 
Because of  persistent challenges in funding markets and  the decline in deposit funding, 
Anglo’s borrowing from the ECB and CBI increased to EUR 23.5 billion by March 2009 (Anglo 
2010; EC 2009). Anglo also received EUR 11.5 billion in emergency liquidity from the CBI, by 
providing collateral that did not quali fy for standard Eurosystem monetary operations 
(Whelan 2012).  
Anglo was offered ELA in 2008 because of fears that its funding difficulties would spill over 
through contagion to other large banks, leading to a sustained economy -wide disruption in 
Ireland. The initial purpose of the ELA was to “buy time,” owing to the systemic importance 
of Anglo and its similarity  to the rest of t he Irish banking system  (Honohan 2010, 131) . 
Following the announcement of the blanket guarantee in September 2008, the broader Irish 
financial system experienced a strong resurgence in liquidity. However, Anglo was unable to 
recover all of its lost deposit funding (Nyberg 2011).  
Anglo received a recapitalization of EUR 4 billion from the Irish authorities as a step toward 
ensuring its long-term viability in May 2009  (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020; E C 
2009). In late May 2009, the financial regulator allowed Anglo to temporarily suspend capital 
requirements following the initial capital injection by the government. The state’s capital 
injection was carried out as a “temporary urgent relief” to allow time to begin restructuring 
the bank to restore long term viability or to move toward a potential liquidation (EC 2009, 
14). 
Through 2010, Anglo received EUR 25.3 billion in additional capital in the form of PNs (a 
type of government liability), which it could use as collateral for loans from the CBI under 
the ELA facility. Anglo’s borrowing under the emergency facility increase d to EUR 28.1 
billion in four tranches by the end of December 2010, mostly backed by the PNs as collateral 
(See footnote 8) (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020).  
Former CBI Governor John Hurley  stated to a joint parliamentary inquiry, that the CBI 
provided emergency liquidity only to bank s based on a determination of solvency b y the 
financial regulator. David Doyle, the former secretary general of the DoF, also stated that 
there was a concern that Anglo’s “illiquidity would rapidly become insolvency” (Houses of 
the Oireachtas 2016, 262).  
270
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 14 ---
The ECB’s rules at the time stated that ELA could be used for a solvent but illiquid credit 
institution which did not have sufficient collateral to use for normal ECB lending operations. 
To determine an institution as systemically important, the CBI could have used three criteria: 
size, interconnectedness, and substitutability . Anglo likely did not satisfy the size and 
substitutability criteria, but its interconnectedness could have justified it being regarded as 
a systemically important institution. Anglo’s collapse would have put additional funding 
pressure on Irish banks due to threats of contagion and common implicit reliance on the Irish 
state for emergency funding (Honohan 2010). (For more details, see Key Design Decision No. 
7, Source and Size of Funding.)   
Anglo’s ELA involved a varying combination of three different contractual arrangements: 
• Master Loan Repurchase Agreement (MLRA);  
• Special Master Repurchase Agreement (SMRA); and  
• Facility Deed (Anglo 2011).  
The majority of the funds provided to Anglo were through the SMRA, including the sale and 
repurchase of PNs (Anglo 2011). 
Anglo was merged with INBS to create a new entity called IBRC in July 2011 (Tynan 2020). 
The outstanding ELA obligations of the merged entity resulted in the collateral’s being seized 
by the CBI and exchanged with other marketable assets when IBRC was liquidated in 
February 2013 (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020).  
At the time of its liquidation  in 2013, IBRC’s total borrowings under the ELA facility were 
roughly EUR 40 billion (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). That included roughly EUR 
25 billion outstanding under the SMRA and EUR 15 billion outstanding under the Facility 
Deed (Houses of the Oireachtas 2013). 
2. Part of a Package (A): The extension of ELA to Anglo was preceded by a broad -
based guarantee of EUR 400 billion covering most deposits and liabilities of six 
Irish banks. 
Ireland implemented a blanket guarantee of EUR 400 billion covering most deposits and 
liabilities of six Irish banks in September 2008 (Schaefer-Brown 2022; Tynan 2020). Anglo 
received two standby liquidity facilities of EUR 3 billion from the CBI and EUR 10 billion from 
Ireland’s largest commercial banks (Honohan 2010, 124) . Anglo never accessed those 
facilities because deposits temporarily recovered following the government guarantee 
announcement. 
Anglo was one of the six core banks covered under the Irish Guarantee Scheme for financial 
institutions adopted under the Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act , 2008 on October 
2, 2008, to maintain the stability of the financial system in Ireland. The guarantee plan would 
be effective for two years, and covered liabilities of the banks incurred between September 
29, 2008 and September 29, 2010.  The scheme covered the following liabilities:  
271
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
• All retail and corporate deposits (to the extent not covered by existing deposit 
protection schemes in the State or any other jurisdiction);  
• Interbank deposits;  
• Senior unsecured debt;  
• Asset covered securities; and  
• Dated subordinated debt ( lower Tier 2),  excluding any intragroup borrowing and 
any debt due to the ECB arising from Eurosystem monetary operations (EC 2008). 
Anglo’s customer loans were denominated in euros, British pounds  (GBP), and US Dollars , 
which the bank managed through foreign currency d erivatives. Anglo had a EUR-GBP swap 
agreement in place with the CBI at a market based fee; the facility had not been used by the 
end of December 2010 . In November 2010, the government also guaranteed payments on  
Anglo’s derivative positions and certain interbank transactions; this facility charged no fees 
(Anglo 2011). 
Part of a Package (B): In January 2009, the Irish government nationalized Anglo , 
ultimately providing EUR 29.3 billion of capital to the bank.  
Anglo was nationalized on January 21, 2009, following the signing into law of the Anglo Irish 
Bank Corporation Act 2009.  From May 2009, the Irish authorities injected EUR 4 billion of 
capital in the form of ordinary shares . In 2010, the minister for finance provided Anglo 
additional capital by issuing PNs, eventually totalling EUR 25.3 billion, which the bank could 
use as collateral to receive further ELA from the central bank (Baudino, Murphy, and 
Svoronos 2020; EC 2009).  The EC also noted at the time of the initial capital injection that:  
The Irish authorities acknowledge that Anglo Irish is a distressed bank and its insolvency 
could lead to a serious disruption of the Irish financial system. In these circumstances, 
the State Investment is required as a matter of absolute urgency to preserve the financial 
stability of the Bank and to safeguard the Irish financial system as a whole due to the 
bank's systemic relevance. This is confirmed by the letter of 27 May 2009 of the Central 
Bank and the Financial Services Authority of Ireland. (EC 2009)  
Part of a Package (C): The Irish government also established an asset purchase 
program through NAMA in December 2009. 
NAMA was operational on December 21, 2009, through the enactment of the National Asset 
Management Agency Act 2009, with the objective of removing certain commercial property 
and land loans from bank balance sheets (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). Anglo was 
one of the five Irish bank s that applied and were approved  for participation in the NAMA 
program. NAMA was instructed to calculate haircuts on the market value of the loans 
purchased from the banks and estimating the long-term economic value of the loans. At first, 
these valuations were car ried out  on a lo an-by-loan level . The average haircut of 57% 
272
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 16 ---
between 2010 and 2012, thereby paying EUR 31.8 billion to acquire assets with a face value 
of EUR 74.4 billion (Nye 2021).  
NAMA ended up acquiring about EUR 14 billion in derivatives that were l argely owned by 
Anglo for EUR 0 (Nye 2021). Anglo was able to sell  EUR 34.4 billion in distressed loans at a 
61% discount to NAMA by the end of 2012 (Tynan 2020). NAMA was established a s a 51% 
privately owned entity, thereby reducing the need to add the asset management company’s 
liabilities to Ireland’s public debt (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). 
Ireland’s minister for finance also used NAMA’s subsidiary, NARL , to extend a loan to IBRC 
to help facilitate the merger of Anglo and INBS in 2013 (Nye 2021). NARL issued new NAMA 
bonds to the CBI in an amount equivalent to the outstanding from the Facility Deed (IBRC 
2014). At the time of IBRC’s liquidation, the outstanding EUR 15 billion to the Facility Deed 
was acquired by NAMA at a value of EUR 12.9 billion (Houses of the Oireachtas 2013). 
3. Legal Authority: The CBI’s legal authority to provide emergency liquidity is drawn 
from existing powers in Section 5B(d) of the Central Bank Act 1942.  
The Central Bank Act 1942 (the Act) provides the statutory basis for the CBI to provide 
emergency liquidity  against collateral to credit institutions in Ireland (Government of 
Ireland 2003, 10) . In particular, Section 5B(d) provides the CBI with a general power to 
“provide loans and other kinds of financial accommodation to credit institutions and other 
persons on the security of such assets and on such terms and conditions as the Board [of 
Directors of the CBI] considers appropriate” (Government of Ireland 2003, 10). The Act also 
provides the CBI with the  power to take action in pursuit of the financial stability objective 
(IMF 2016) . Section 7A of the Act, states:  
(1) In discharging its functions and exercising its powers as part of the European System 
of Central Banks, the primary objective of the Bank is to maintain price stability (2) The 
Bank also has the following objectives: (a) contributing to the stability of the financial 
system, (b) promoting the efficient and effective operation of paym ent and settlement 
systems; and (c) discharging such other fucntions and powers as are conferred or 
imposed on it by the Rome Treaty, the ESCB Statute or any enactment . (Government of 
Ireland 2003, 12) 
A new act passed on October 2, 2008, the Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008, 
provided the minister for finance  with the authority to provide financial support or 
accommodation to a specific credit institution . The minister can regulate the credit 
institution or its subsidiary, in exchange for pr oviding financial support (Government of 
Ireland 2008) . The CBI received formal confirmation from the minister for finance  to be 
made whole for any shortfall in the liquidation of collateral provided by Anglo (CBI 2011). 
273
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
As a member of the EU, Ireland must comply with the prohibition on monetary financing 
contained in Article 123(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)9, 
which reads  (emphasis added):  
Overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility  with the European Central 
Bank or with the central banks of the Member States (hereinafter referred to as 
‘national central banks’) in favour of Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, 
central governments, regional, local or other public authorit ies, other bodies 
governed by public law, or public undertakings of Member States  shall be 
prohibited, as shall the purchase directly from them by the European Central Bank or 
national central banks of debt instruments. (EU 2009b, art. 123) 
TFEU Article 12 3 prohibits the extension of liquidity to insolvent firms (at least without a 
state guarantee), which is considered a public undertaking (in other words, one that should 
be supported with state resources). While the ECB has its own implementing agreements 
and procedures to ensure compliance with TFEU Article 123 within the Eurosystem (see Key 
Design Decision No. 5, Governance), they are not legally binding; 10 the monetary financing 
prohibition—including its application to emergency liquidity —is EU -level law , and thus 
applies even to those nations that are Member States of the EU but not members of the 
Eurosystem. For more on the application of the monetary financing prohibition to ELA, see 
(Arnold 2025).  
Article 14.4 of the Statue of the European System of Central Banks and of the European 
Central Bank (ESCB) authorizes the ECB’s Governing Council to, with a two -thirds vote, 
prohibit the provision of emergency liquidity assistance (ELA)  by a national central bank if 
it “[interferes] with the objectives and tasks of the ESCB” (EU 2009a). The ESCB, by virtue of 
being annexed (as protocol no. 4) to the TFEU in 2009,11 has the same legal character as the 
TFEU. That is to say, although the ECB Governing Council may, from time to time, publish 
non-legally-binding procedural guidance, its authorization to prohibit or suspend a national 
central bank’s activities under Article 14.4 of the ESCB is legally binding and statutory in 
nature. In practice, the ECB Governing Council has cited suspected TFEU Article 123 
violations when suspending ELA provision by a national cental bank, see Arnold (2025) Key 
Design Decision No. 5, Governance.  
 
9 The TFEU, itself based on the Treaty of Maastricht of 1992 , is one of the EU’s two foundational treaties (the 
other being the Treaty on European Union). It sets out in detail the principles and objectives of the EU and the 
scope and functional responsibilities of EU institutions (the Treaty on European Union in contrast defines the 
EU’s purpose and lays out its institutions and form). As a technicality, before the Lisbon Treaty came into effect 
in 2009, TFEU Article 123 was Article 101 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community, but the content 
was unchanged when the Lisbon Treaty relocated the article . 
10 That is to say that those agreements and procedures implement EU law, but are not themselves legally 
enforceable. Any legal actions resulting from a violation of the monetary financing prohibition would be 
enforced as EU law and, in practice, the issues are raised by the European Commission. See (Arnold 2025). 
11 Before the Lisbon Treaty, in protocol no. 3 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community, as amended 
in 1997. 
274
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 18 ---
4. Administration: The emergency liquidity to Anglo  was fully administered by the 
CBI, with close engagements with Ireland’s Department of Finance and the ECB. 
Anglo’s emergency liquidity  was administered by the CBI throughout the duration of the 
facility, in line with CBI’s legal authority (CBI 2011; IMF 2016). 
As a rule, national central banks are required to inform the ECB of the details of any 
emergency liquidity operation within two business days of the action. The ECB needs to be 
informed of the following for the liquidity program : the counterparty receiving funds , the 
duration of the loan, the total loan amount, the collateral pledged including its valuation, the 
haircuts applied, and the specific reasons for the provision  of emergency funds (i.e., margin 
calls, deposit outflows, etc.). The ECB Governing Council can decide to request additio nal 
information from the central bank , or broaden the reporting requirements, and make 
reporting more stringent if it deems necessary (Mourmouras 2017). 
More generally and despite the existence of ELA in the Eurosystem since  before 2008, in 
October 2013, t he ECB published a revised official definition and description of its 
procedures (Mourmouras 2017). The ECB clarified in 2013 that euro-area credit institutions 
can receive funds from their central banks not only through monetary policy operations, but 
also exceptionally through ELA. Any costs or risks arising from the provision of emergency 
liquidity to a solvent institution is the responsibility of the national central bank (ECB 2013).  
On June 19, 2017, the ECB published a revised emergency liquidity agreement, replacing the 
2013 version, with the intent of increasing transparency around the governing rules and 
procedures (ECB 2017b). The ECB’s latest disclosure required reporting from the national 
central bank, regardless of the size and nature of the emergency liquidity provision. The ECB 
also required periodic disclosures on the liquidity facility until the entire emergency loan is 
repaid. The ECB’s Governing Council can allow a national central bank to provide emergency 
liquidity beyond a certain ceiling within a predetermined period to avoid potential systemic 
implications (ECB 2017a). 
5. Governance: The governor of CBI is the ultimate decision -maker in granting or 
denying emergency liquidity , subject to reporting to and limitations by the  ECB. 
Researchers, including Nyberg and Honohan, have produced reviews of the Irish 
experience with Anglo to provide an analysis and other recommendations to 
reform regulatory institutions and enhance financial stability.  
Detailed procedures and legal underp inning for the emergency liquidity provision were 
decided by the CBI’s board in November 2007 , which granted the powers to approve the 
emergency facility to the CBI governor. If a bank did not have eligible collateral to access the 
refinancing operations with the ECB, it could apply for ELA from the CBI . The CBI’s board 
authorized the governor and the CEO of the financial regulator to discuss solutions with the 
Irish government (Honohan 2010). 
In Ireland, generally, the financial regulator was responsible for microprudential 
supervision, and the governor of the CBI was responsible for overall stability (Honohan 
2010). A Financial Stability Committee comprise d senior staff of the CBI and the financial 
275
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
regulator (Honohan 2010). The Irish government utilized the Exchequer to provide capital 
injections to Anglo and the National Pension Reserve Fund for the PNs to IBRC. The National 
Pension Reserve Fund was a sovereign wealth fund established by Ir eland in the 1990s 
during a period of fiscal fortitude (Honohan 2012). 
In line with the EU’s guidance, Ireland created the Domestic Standing Group  (DSG) in July 
2007 to improve cooperation among the DoF, financial regulator, and the CBI (Houses of the 
Oireachtas 2016; Nyberg 2011). NTMA, responsible for managing the Irish state’s funds, also 
attended DSG meetings during the summer of 2008. Between May and June 2008, the 
minister for finance met with the senior management of the NTMA to discuss the latter’s role 
in addressing financial stability issues. The CBI also set  up a liquidity monitoring group to 
evaluate the needs of the banking system, along with monitoring the available collateral at 
banks for the ECB’s refinancing or the CBI’s emergency lendin g facilities.  The DSG had 
previously discussed the creation of a special resolution regime for banks, but no progress 
was made due to legislative complexities.  The CBI also carried out crisis management 
exercises, including one with the EU, using its black book manual which includes guidance 
on topics ranging from emergency liquidity, legal, and logistical concerns (Nyberg 2011).  
Honohan has noted that this crisis manual was not relied on in practice, since the procedures 
were seen as “excessively cumberso me” and time consuming during the crisis (Baudino, 
Murphy, and Svoronos 2020).   
Analyses by PwC and Merrill Lynch were used to assess the recapitalization needs of Anglo 
in late 2008. Crisis management was the responsibility of the DoF and the NTMA, with the 
minister for finance leading the assessment of recapitalizations. Mer rill Lynch had strongly 
advised the minister for finance  in December 2008 to consider taking Anglo into state 
ownership (Nyberg 2011). 
There was concerns of overlapping mandates between the DoF, financial regulator, and CBI. 
The CBI’s staff has been accused of self -censorship, which makes it harder to address 
financial stability issues . The EC believes that the CBI could have acted earlie r to address 
stability concerns with individual banks by also engaging the financial regulator to conduct 
a deeper analysis (Nyberg 2011). 
The ELA facility was subject to regular approval by the ECB’s Governing Council (Baudino, 
Murphy, and Svoronos 2020) . By the end of 2009, the issuance of PNs to Anglo was closed 
by written communication between Ireland’s minister for finance , and the Competition 
Directorate General of the European Commission (DGCOMP) (Honohan 2012). 
Pursuant to Article 14.4 of the ESCB, the ECB Governing Council can, with a two-thirds vote, 
prohibit ELA provision by a national central bank (see Key Design Decision No. 3, Legal 
Authority). During the Global Financial Crisis and the European Sovereign Debt Crisis, the 
ECB Governing Council made that determination, variously suspending ELA and 
conditioning further approval for it on policy changes in the country in question (Arnold 
2025). 
Although the ECB Governing Council’s ability to suspend a national central bank’s ELA 
existed since well before the official publication of any guidelines, the ECB began to publicize 
276
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 20 ---
non-legally-binding guidance on its ELA expectations in 2013. At that time, it published its 
ELA Procedures, which outlines numerous ex post reporting requirements, including, inter 
alia, amount, interest rate, collateral, supervisory assessment, and motivating reason (ECB 
2013). Further, if ELA exceeds EUR 500 million, the relevant national central bank must alert 
the ECB Governing Council as soon as possible of the extension of ELA before the fact. Under 
the ELA Procedures, any ELA exceeding EUR 2 billion will be automatically reviewed by the 
ECB Governing Council to ensure that it does not merit suspension or alteration resulting 
from its interference in ECB tasks and responsibilities as outlined in ESCB Article 14.4 (ECB 
2013). 
In 2017, the ECB published its Agreement on Emerg ency Liquidity Assistance, which 
provided further guidance on the ECB’s policies regarding ELA and replaced the earlier 2013 
ELA Procedures (ECB 2017b). In the 2017 agreement, the ECB added language that clarified 
the limitations of the prohibition on monetary financing: “this document acknowledges that 
ELA must be in compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing (Art. 123 of the Treaty 
of the Functioning of the European Union [TFEU])” (ECB 2017a). It added further guidance 
to ELA procedures, requir ing, inter alia , a funding plan within two months of the first 
extension of ELA, a letter to the president of ECB regarding the ELA if provided for more than 
six months, compliance with various solvency requirements, and a penalty interest rate. The 
ECB revised its ELA agreement in 2020 and most recently in 2024.  
As such, the ECB also exercised its powers in 2010 to caution the large provision of ELA and 
impose Ireland to undertake structural reforms as a condition for further provision of ELA. 
On October  15, 2010, the president of the ECB wrote to Ireland’s  minister for finance  
cautioning that “large scale provision of liquidity  . . . to entities such as Anglo  Irish Bank 
should not be taken for granted as a long -term solution” (Trichet 2010a). On November 19, 
2010, the ECB  president imposed explicit conditionality for the further provision of 
emergency liquidity because of its overall size. Among other measures, the Irish authorities’ 
request for further financial support  had to include a commitment to unde rtake fiscal 
consolidation, structural reforms , and financial sector restructuring including 
recapitalization (Trichet 2010b). 
As of 2020, the institution receiving the ELA is also expected to provide an updated funding 
plan on a quarterly basis, within tw o months following the first provision of emergency 
assistance, and report regulatory capital ratios on a monthly basis. If the ELA provision lasts 
beyond six months, the governor of the national central bank is expected to write to the 
president of the ECB with an exit strategy for the ELA. The ECB’s Governing Council can now 
impose additional restrictions on any ELA provided beyond 12 months (a provision that did 
not exist in the 2008 to 2013 period) (ECB 2020). 
The ECB also directed national central banks to provide emergency liquidity at a rate of 100 
basis points plus the Eurosystem’s marginal lending facility rate . For euro -denominated 
repurchase transactions, the centr al bank must charge a minimum rate of 1% per annum . 
The latest amendments prohibit monetary financing of institutions that have been deemed 
insolvent by national laws (ECB 2020). 
277
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 21 ---
6. Communication and Disclosure: There were limited public disclosures through 
annual reports on the emergency liquidity granted to Anglo by the CBI.  
Anglo disclosed the total amount of special liquidity assistance it received from the CBI in its 
annual and interim financial reports  (Anglo 2010; Anglo 2011; IBRC 2012)  but did not 
identify that the assistance was ELA . In its 2010 and 2011 annual reports, Anglo and IBRC, 
its successor company, briefly described the three different liquidity programs offered by 
the CBI (see Overview) (Anglo 2011). The CBI also disclosed the range of hair cuts on the 
three liquidity facilities in the notes to account of its annual report (CBI 2011; CBI 2012; CBI 
2013; CBI 2014). 
The CBI itself did not disclose any emergency liquidity borrowings by Anglo or the  total  
Eurosystem borrowings by all six Irish banks (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020) . 
Communications specific to Anglo focused primarily on the blanket guarantee , capital 
injections, and restructuring . The CBI’s provision of the ELA facility was disclosed in  the 
bank’s annual report in 2010 , and clarified the difference from the ECB’s lending for 
monetary policy purposes. The CBI described the provision of liquidity to a credit institution 
against suitable collateral defined by the central bank . The CBI discu ssed that it had the 
backing of the minister for finance for any shortfalls from lending under the ELA facility (CBI 
2011).  
In January 200 9, the minister for finance , after consultation with the board of Anglo, 
announced the decision to take the bank into public ownership through a press release. The 
minister announced that the Irish state was the only “available potential owner” for Anglo, 
and that Donal O’Connor would continue as the chair of the bank’s board (CBI 2009, 12).     
The CBI’s annual report in 2010 indicated EUR 11.5 billion in outstanding balance on the 
emergency liquidity loans to Anglo under  the “Other Assets” line of the CBI’s balance sheet 
(CBI 2011). The EC noted that the Irish authorities did not expect to recover any of the capital 
injections provided to Anglo, which indicated the high level of distress of the bank (EC 2009). 
Former CBI Governor John Hurley clarified to a joint committee that the central bank never 
provides emergency liquidity to an insolvent bank. The financial regulator is responsible for 
providing a certificate of solvency to an Irish bank. Hurley disclosed that the CBI had made 
EUR 3 billion in ELA available to Anglo in September 2008, at the time the government 
announced the blanket deposit and liability guarantee. Hurley also discussed that only about 
EUR 1 billion was drawn from the ELA before the guarantee was activated  and the facility 
was deemed unnecessary (Houses of the Oireachtas 2015).  
In October 2010, then-ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet wrote a letter to the Irish Minster 
of Finance, Brian Lenihan, warning that the “large provision of liquidity” to Anglo was not a 
long-term solution; he cited the concerns of the ECB’s Governing Council on providing such 
funding on a permanent basis (Trichet 2010a, 2). The ECB president, in a follow up letter in 
November 2010, stated the “ [extreme] concern” of the overall credit exposure of the 
Eurosystem towards the Irish banking system  (Trichet 2010b, 2). The Irish authorities had 
to then officiall y request additional support from the ECB, while committing to fiscal 
278
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 22 ---
consolidation, structur al reforms, and restructuring of their banking sector (Baudino, 
Murphy, and Svoronos 2020) . At the end of 2010, the majority of Anglo’s borrowing was 
under the SMRA, using PNs as collateral (Anglo 2010; Anglo 2011). The ECB’s concerns with 
the outsized liquidity provision to Anglo may have led to the CBI launching the Facility Deed 
in December 2010 (Anglo 2011). After 2010, the Facility Deed was responsible for about EUR 
15 billion in incremental liquidity provision to Anglo (BOI 2012). 
Anglo’s solvency in September 2008 was questioned in Ireland’s Joint Committee of Inquiry 
into the Banking Crisis by Brendan McDonagh , the CEO  of NAMA,  and John Corrigan, the 
former CEO of NTMA (Houses of the Oireachtas 2016). 
The ECB released a set of disclosures titled the Irish Letters in 2023, which shed light on the 
ECB’s involvement with regulatory decisions in relation to Anglo . On the topic of the 
potential bail-in of An glo’s senior debt in 2011, the ECB expressed “the view that the Irish 
authorities’ decision to fully honour the outstanding senior debts of Anglo Irish Bank was 
the least damaging course of action to pursue” (ECB 2023, 4) . The ECB believed that the 
potential negative spillovers of such a bail -in would impact other Irish and Eurosystem 
banks (ECB 2023).   
7. Source and Size of Funding: The CBI fully funded the ELA facilities and at peak 
provided more than EUR 40 billion of emergency liquidity to Anglo. 
In late 2008, Anglo was initially provided standby liquidity facilities of EUR 3 billion from the 
CBI and EUR 10 billion from the two largest commercial banks, BOI and AIB (Honohan 2010). 
Former CBI Governor Hurley disclosed that Anglo had drawn up to EUR 1 billio n from the 
standby facility before the guarantee was activated and the facility was deemed unnecessary 
(Houses of the Oireachtas 2015).  
By March 2009, Anglo’s borrowing from central banks, including the ECB and CBI, had 
increased to EUR 23.5 billion from EUR 7.6 billion in September 2008 (EC 2009). Following 
Anglo’s nationalization, CBI agreed to provide the bank with EUR 11.5 billion in ELA against 
collateral that did not qualify for standard Eurosystem monetary operations (Whelan 2012). 
Anglo’s access to  the ELA facility grew from EUR 10 billion in February 2009 to EUR 28.1 
billion by the end of December 2010 (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020) . By the end of 
2011, IBRC’s (Anglo’s parent entity) borrowings from the CBI’s emergency liquidity facility 
had increased to EUR 40.1 billion (IBRC 2012). At IBRC’s liquidation in 2013, the outstanding 
liquidity provision under the ELA amounted to EUR 39.5 billion (see Figure 3) (CBI 2014). 
During the four years that it was active, from 2009 to 2013, Anglo’s ELA facility was provided 
through an evolving mix of three contractual arrangements: 
• An MLRA backed by collateral from the bank’s unencumbered customer loans 
(Anglo 2010). The rate charged by the MLRA borrowings was set by the CBI at each 
rollover and was linked to the ECB’s marginal lending facility rate (Anglo 2011; 
Kinsella 2011). Anglo’s borrowing from the MLRA had increased to EUR 11.5 billion 
279
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 23 ---
at the end of 2009 and appears to have be en the only form of ELA outstanding for 
Anglo at the time (Anglo 2010). 
• An SMRA, launched in 2010, backed mostly by the government promissory notes. At 
the end of 2010, EUR 23.5 billion in PNs from the SMRA accounted for close to 90% 
of Anglo’s ELA (see Figure 3) (Anglo 2010; Anglo 2011). 
• A Facility Deed, launched in December 2010, was an unsecured loan facility 
guaranteed by the minister for finance  (Anglo 2011) . At the end of 2010, the 
combined IBRC after Anglo’s merger with INBS had EUR 10 billion outstanding 
under this facility, one-quarter of the total (BOI 2012). The initial term of the facility 
was for one month, but it was later extended to June 30, 2012. Borrowing from this 
facility was at EUR 14 billion at the end of 2011, before usage dropped to EUR 5 
billion at the end of May 2012 (BOI 2012).  
Figure 3: Anglo’s Estimated ELA Borrowings from 2009 to 2013 (EUR billions) 
 
Sources: Anglo 2010; Anglo 2011; Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020; CBI 2014; Houses of the Oireachtas 2013; 
authors’ analysis. 
The CBI disclosed outstanding amounts provided in ELA loans to Irish banks at EUR 11.5 
billion in 2009, EUR 49.5 billion in 2010, and EUR 42.4 billion in 2011 (CBI 2011; CBI 2012). 
As per Figure 4, Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos (2020) estimates that in early 2011 the total 
emergency liquidity provided by the CBI through the ELA facility to all banks peaked at above 
EUR 60 billion.    
  
280
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 24 ---
Figure 4: Irish Banks’ Utilization of Central Bank Liquidity Operations 
 
Source: Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020. 
Anglo received additional PNs from the DoF in 2010:  
• EUR 8.3 billion on March 30; 
• EUR 2 billion on May 28; 
• EUR 8.6 billion on August 23; 
• EUR 6.4 billion on December 31. 
These PNs —which were issued by the government, were not marketable, and had long 
maturities—were assets on Anglo’s balance sheet, allowing the bank to increase its 
regulatory capital in line with CBI’s requirement s (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020) . 
Anglo posted these PNs as collateral to obtain additional cash liquidity from the ELA facility 
(Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). 
Before receiving a package from the EU and IMF, Irish banks received significant liquidity 
from the ECB. In January 2010, the Eurosystem’s liquidity provision to Irish banks was EUR 
90 billion and accelerated rapidly to EUR 140 billion by November (or 63% of Ireland’s 2010 
GDP). This also represented around 25% of the ECB’s  total lending, which was an 
“unprecedented level of exposure” to Irish banks, which represented less than one percent 
share capital in the ECB (see Figure 4) (ECB 2023, 3). 
8. Rate and Fees: The CBI charged Anglo for the emergency liquidity at a rate linked 
to the Eurosystem’s marginal lending facility rate.  
The interest rate charged by the CBI to Anglo for the emergency liquidity wa s linked to the 
ECB’s marginal lending facility rate (Anglo 2010). However, research did not uncover public 
information on the specific rate charged to Anglo.  
Professor Karl Whelan at University College Dublin  estimated that the CBI’s emergency 
liquidity facility charged a minimum rate equal to the Eurosystem’s marginal lending facility 
281
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 25 ---
rate plus 100 bps (Whelan 2012).  He further estimated the rate to have averaged 3% in 2011 
(Whelan 2012).    
As noted, in 2010, Anglo received EUR 25.3 billion in PNs from Irish authorities, which paid 
an annual interest rate of 10% (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). As assets on Anglo’s 
balance sheet, these notes were sufficiently large to ensure Anglo’s capital remained in line 
with regulatory requirements. Anglo also used the PNs as collateral to borrow from the CBI.  
In December 2010, Anglo requested a change in the legal terms of t he PNs that allowed for 
an interest holiday in 2011 and 2012. But the use of IFRS accounting treatment allowed 
Anglo to continue earning interest income on the PNs in 2011 and 2012.  The floating rate 
NAMA bonds provided to Anglo charged interest at the six-month Euribor rate, receivable 
semiannually (Anglo 2011).  
The Facility Deed facility was reported to charge a rate of 4.5% for providing unsecured 
emergency liquidity to IBRC (Anglo’s parent) in 2013 (CBI 2014). 
9. Loan Duration: The CBI’s emergency liquidity provided to Anglo lasted for four 
years and ended  when IBRC (Anglo’s parent entity) was liquidated ; at that time, 
the government’s PN and the ELA were replaced with a marketable f loating-rate 
sovereign bond that the CBI could sell over time. 
Research did not indicate any  public information on the maturities for each of the CBI’s 
emergency loans  provided. Media reports  noted that the  CBI’s emergency liquidity had a 
maximum maturity of seven days, which can be rolled over at the CBI ’s discretion (Noonan 
2011). The ELA is intended to be used for a very short period (Honohan 2010).  
Anglo started to use the  CBI’s emergency liquidity facility in early 2009 (Anglo 2010; EC 
2009). The use of the facility ended  on February  7, 2013, through a collateral exchange 
transaction when IBRC (Anglo’s parent entity) was liquidated and CBI took ownership of all 
of IBRC’s assets , including the PNs (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020) . The Irish stat e 
agreed to repay Anglo’s emergency liquidity  to the CBI over time (Baudino, Murphy, and 
Svoronos 2020) . Rather than receiving cash as repayment for the ELA, CBI’s claim was 
restructured through a collateral exchange transaction (CBI 2014).  
The Facility Deed had an initial term of one month but was later extended to June 30, 2012 , 
and beyond (BOI 2012). It was purchased by NAMA from CBI when IBRC was liquidated in 
exchange for newly issued government -guaranteed NAMA bonds (MerrionStreet 2013a) . 
Some of the PNs that were used as collateral with the CBI for the ELA eventually had a final 
maturity at 2031 (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020). 
282
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 26 ---
10. Balance Sheet Protection (A): Anglo’s collateral appears to have been subject to an 
average haircut of 4% to 8%, based on its annual reports. 
The ELA facility was described as a loan, distinct and separate from the monetary operations 
of the ECB, provided to a credit institution against suitable collateral, where suitability is in 
line with criteria defined by the CBI (CBI 2011).  
As noted, Anglo received ELA against three contractual arrangements: an MLRA, an SMRA, 
and a Facility Deed . Each had its own collateral or security requirements.  Anglo’s annual 
reports provide some information that can be used to estimate the haircuts on collateral. At 
the end of 2009, Anglo ’s borrowing under  the MLRA came to EUR 11.5 billion  (CBI 2011). 
Against that obligation, Anglo had assigned EUR 12 billion in customer loans as collateral, 
representing a weighted average haircut of about 4% (CBI 2010). 
At the end of 2010, Anglo’s borrowing under the two repurchase agreement facilities totalled 
EUR 28.1 billion. Anglo held EUR 4.1 billion in customer loans as collateral under the MLRA, 
and EUR 25.3 billion in government PNs under the SMRA, for a total EUR 29.4 billion (Anglo 
2011). That results in a similar weighted average haircut of about 4%. 
At the end of 2011, IBRC’s borrowing under the combined programs totalled EUR 40.1 
billion, of which EUR 10 billion was through the Facility Deed and not collateralized  (BOI 
2012; IBRC  2012). The remaining EUR 30.1 billion was through the two collateralized 
programs. At that time, IBRC held EUR 2.6 billion in customer loans as collateral under the 
MLRA; and EUR 28.5 billion in government PNs plus EUR 0.8 billion in NAMA bonds under 
the SMRA, for a total EUR 31.9 billion (IBRC 2012). That suggests a weighted average haircut 
of about 6%. 
The CBI disclosed in its annual report s that haircuts to collateral were in the range of 5.5% 
to 80% in 2010, 1.5% to 58% in 2011 , and 1.5% to 5.5% in 2012  (CBI 2011; CBI 2012; CBI 
2013). The CBI also received a formal assurance (“formal comfort”  or “letter of comfort” ) 
from the minister for finance  to be made whole on any shortfall in collateral values (CBI 
2011, 104) . The CBI used a similar approach to collateral as employed for Eurosystem 
monetary policy operations  (CBI 2011). 
Research did  not uncover disclosure from the CBI on all the collateral that Anglo pledged 
through the length of its emergency liquidity borrowing. The CBI disclosed the following on 
the collateral accepted under the emergency liquidity facility , consistent with Anglo’s own 
reporting:  
The Bank has in place specific legal instruments in respect of each type of collateral 
accepted. These comprise  (i) Promissory Notes  issued by the Minister for Finance to 
specific credit institutions and transferrable by deed, (ii) Master Loan Repurchase Deeds 
covering investment /development loans , (iii) Framework Agreements in respect of 
Mortgage-Backed Promissory Notes covering non -securitised pools of residential 
mortgages, (iv) Special Master Repurchase Agreements covering collateral no longer 
eligible for ECB -related operations  and (v) Facility Deeds providing a Government 
Guarantee . . . Where appropriate, haircuts (ranging from 5.5 per cent to 80 per cent) 
283
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 27 ---
have been applied to the collateral. Credit risk is miti gated by the level of the haircuts 
and the government guarantee (CBI 2011, 104). 
Regarding the ECB’s role in determining the CBI’s evaluation of collateral, Mario Draghi notes 
that “collateral is assessed by the competent supervisor, which at that time was  the Central 
Bank of Ireland, and that is crucial because if the supervisor says the collateral is adequate, 
good and sufficient, then the Governing Council has no reason to object to the request by the 
national central bank” (Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs 2015, 5).  
This is in line with the notion that CBI’s emergency lending under the ELA facility is distinct 
and separate from regular funding operations carried out for monetary policy 
implementation purposes through the ECB (CBI 2011) . Unlike  normal monetary policy 
operations, where any losses are shared in proportion to the size of their economies and 
populations, any risks from the ELA facility are borne solely by CBI (IMF 2016). The relatively 
low apparent haircuts reflect the government guarantee that attached to the SMRA and 
Facility Deed loans. 
The IMF reported that the troika program (EC, ECB, and IMF) of 2010 was controversial due 
to the decision to impose losses on EUR 19 bi llion worth of senior unsecured creditors. The 
IMF favored imposing a 50% haircut, which was fully supported by the Irish authorities. The 
ECB opposed such a haircut and their decision prevailed, on the grounds that such a move 
may disrupt wholesale funding markets across euro-area banks (Eichengreen 2015). 
Balance Sheet Protection (B): The CBI lent to Anglo with an indemnity from the 
minister for finance on any losses arising from collateral shortfall. 
The additional safeguard from the CBI’s perspective is  the indemnity from the minister for 
finance to cover any shortfall that results from the liquidation of collateral from the provision 
of ELA to Anglo (Anglo 2011). This guarantee was possible from the power derived from The 
Credit Institutions (Financial Support) Act 2008 . At the time of the CBI’s provision of 
emergency liquidity to Anglo, there were concerns on the Irish sovereign’s capacity to stand 
behind such an indemnity (Eichengreen 2015) . The Irish state’s guarantee of the CBI’s 
emergency liquidity expired in 2018, a nd the possibility to extend in legislation was not 
exercised. The IMF recommended that the CBI and DoF should explore ways to mitigate 
potential losses, in the future scenario of a DoF backstop for the CBI’s emergency lending to 
a bank in resolution (IMF 2022).  
Balance Sheet Protection (C): The Facility Deed was unsecured and backed by a 
government guarantee, but the minister had a counterindemnity agreement from 
the bank itself. 
According to Anglo’s 2010 annual report, the Facility Deed was “an unsecured loan facility 
guaranteed by the Minister for Finance, who separately benefits from a counter indemnity 
from the Bank should the guarantee be calle d upon” (Anglo 2011, 95).  In other words, the 
minister guaranteed to the CBI that it would cover payments on Facility Deed loans, but the 
bank itself provided indemnity back to the minister (the value of this counterindemnity 
reflected the banking assets that remained on Anglo’s balance sheet). The counterindemnity 
284
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 28 ---
agreement was signed between the minister for finance and Anglo on December 23, 2010, 
and was characterized as “co-terminus with payment of interest and prepayment of principal 
in full under the Facility Deed” (BOI 2012, 56). 
11. Impact on Monetary Policy Transmission : The CBI’s emergency liquidity was 
subject to close monitoring by the ECB’s Governing Council to protect the integrity 
of ECB’s monetary policy. 
As a member of the Eurosystem, the CBI is responsible for maintaining price stabil ity in 
Ireland through the implementation of ECB decisions on monetary policy (CBI 2023). Article 
14.4 of the Statute of the European System on Central Banks assigns the ECB’s Governing 
Council responsibility for restricting emergency liquidity operations if they interfere with 
the objectives and tasks of the Eurosystem (ECB 2017a, 4). Considering the large amounts of 
emergency lending granted to Anglo, the ECB stated in its communication to the Irish finance 
minister that the Governing Council would closely monitor the CBI’s emergency liquidity, as 
it may interfere with the objectives of the Eurosystem and may violate the  prohibition of 
monetary financing (Trichet 2010a). 
After IBRC’s liquidation  in 2013 , the CBI took ownership of the PNs, NAMA bonds, and 
Facility Deed. The Irish government exchanged the PNs for a portfolio of eight Irish sovereign 
floating rate notes (FRNs) (totaling EU R 27.8 billion) with maturities of 25  to 40 years. The 
Facility Deed was transferred to NAMA in return for NAMA bonds (totaling EUR 12.6 billion). 
The CBI undertook to sell the FRNs as soon as possible subject to financial stability concerns 
and no later t han a schedule that was announced in February 2013 (CBI 2014). This was 
designed to strike a balance between monetary financing concerns associated with 
protracted holdings of bonds and the risks of a fire sale (Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 
2020). All NAMA bonds had been fully redeemed by 2017, and all of the floating rate notes 
had been sold by 2023 (CBI 2024).  
The ECB also provided other situations in which emergency liquidity may be curtailed , 
including the central bank’s financing of public sector obligations, or the provision of 
emergency liquidity to an institution that has been deemed insolvent as per national laws 
(ECB 2017a). 
12.  Other Conditions: It is unclear if Anglo was subject to addit ional conditions that 
are specifically tied to receiving the CBI’s emergency liquidity. 
Since the conditions of the ELA are not disclosed, it is unclear if Anglo was subject to 
additional conditions that are specifically tied to receiving ELA. Anglo was required to report 
its daily liquidity position to the CBI and the IFSRA  from late 2008 (Tynan 2020). 
As of March 2009, Anglo’s CET1 capital ratio of 1.4%  fell below the regulatory minimum of 
4%. Given that the bank is covered under the state guarantee scheme, this triggered a need 
for a fundamental restructuring of Anglo. In addition, the Irish government noted that it 
would submit a restructuring plan  for Anglo by November 2009  to the European 
Commission. The restructuring plan introduced some restrictions on Anglo’s commercial 
activities, including not providing new lending to existing customers for at least 12 months, 
285
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 29 ---
an deleveraging the bank’s balance sheet. To avoid any distortions to competition, Anglo was 
restricted from marketing its support from the Irish state as a commercial advantage (EC 
2009). 
  
286
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 30 ---
References and Key Program Documents 
Summary of Program 
(BOI 2012) Bank of Ireland (BOI). 2012. “Proposed Securities Repurchase Transaction 
between Bank of Ireland and Irish Bank Resolution Corporation Limited, Guaranteed by the 
Minister for Finance.” May 30, 2012. 
Document presenting a securities repurchase agreement between the Bank of Ireland and 
Ireland’s Resolution unit. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5156 
(Mourmouras 2017) Mourmouras, John. 2017. “On Emergency Liquidity Assistance: Theory 
and Evidence.” Speech presented at the Political Economy of Financial Markets (PEFM) 
program, Oxford University, Oxford, February 27, 2017, February 27, 2017. 
Speech by BOG deputy governor on ELA in the eurozone during the GFC. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/12946 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(ECB 2013) European Central Bank (ECB). 2013. “ELA Procedures.” October 17, 2013. 
Document describing the procedures for the provision of ELA to individual credit institutions. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/12957 
(ECB 2017a) European Central Bank (ECB). 2017a. “Agreement on Emergency Liquidity 
Assistance - Updated 17 May 2017.” May 17, 2017. 
Document describing the changes to the ECB’s emergency liquidity assistance program. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/12959 
(ECB 2020) European Central Bank (ECB). 2020. “Agreement on Emergency Liquidity 
Assistance - Updated 9 November 2020.” November 9, 2020. 
Document describing the changes to the ECB’s emergency liquidity assistance program from 
2017. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/775 
(EU 2009a) European Union (EU). 2009a. “The Statute of The European System of Central 
Banks and of The European Central Bank.” January 1, 2009. 
EU statute on the European system of central banks. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/731 
(EU 2009b) European Union (EU). 2009b. Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union. 5/8/2008. 
Treaty prohibiting monetary financing by Eurosystem national central banks. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/3841 
  
287
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 31 ---
(Government of Ireland 2003) Government of Ireland. 2003. Central Bank and Financial 
Services Authority of Ireland Act 2003. Number 12 of 2003. 
Statute providing an amendment to the Central Bank Act of 1942. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4479 
(Government of Ireland 2008) Government of Ireland. 2008. Credit Institutions (Financial 
Support) Act 2008. 
Act that established the basis for financially supporting credit insitutions in Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14834/ 
Media Stories 
(Noonan 2011) Noonan, Laura. 2011. “Banks Pay Less than 3pc Interest on €51bn of 
Emergency Funding.” The Independent, February 8, 2011. 
News article on the interest paid by Irish banks on the AHEL. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4486 
Press Releases/Announcements 
(CBI 2009) Central Bank of Ireland (CBI). 2009. “Press Releases January – June 2009.”  
Press releases of the Central Bank of Ireland between January and June 2009. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4467 
(CBI 2023) Central Bank of Ireland (CBI). 2023. “Role of the Central Bank of Ireland within 
the Eurosystem.”  
Webpage of the ECB detailing its role. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4474 
(ECB 2017b) European Central Bank (ECB). 2017b. “ECB Publishes ELA Agreement.” June 
19, 2017. 
Webpage detailing the press release pertaining to the ELA agreement. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4477 
(ECB 2023) European Central Bank (ECB). 2023. “Irish Letters.”  
Document from the ECB summarising its correpondence with the CBI. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/596/ 
(Government of Ireland 2022) Government of Ireland. 2022. “Irish Bank Resolution 
Corporation (IBRC).” January 14, 2022. 
Document describing the merger and special liquidation of two financial institutions in 
Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5166 
(MerrionStreet 2013a) MerrionStreet. 2013a. “Government Announces Revised Promissory 
Notes Agreement.” February 7, 2013. 
Press release describing the approval of legislation for the orderly wind up of IBRC. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5167 
288
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 32 ---
(MerrionStreet 2013b) MerrionStreet. 2013b. “Taoiseach’s Announcement on the 
Promissory Notes.” February 7, 2013. 
Press release describing the replacement of promissory notes by the Central Bank of Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5155 
Reports/Assessments 
(Anglo 2009) Anglo Irish Bank (Anglo). 2009. Annual Reports & Accounts 2008.  
Annual report of Anglo Irish Bank for the year 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5165 
(Anglo 2010) Anglo Irish Bank (Anglo). 2010. Annual Report & Accounts 2009. 
Annual report of Anglo Irish Bank for the year 2009. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4466 
(Anglo 2011) Anglo Irish Bank (Anglo). 2011. Annual Report & Accounts 2010. 
Annual report of Anglo Irish Bank for the year 2010. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5161 
(CBI 2010) Central Bank of Ireland (CBI). 2010. Annual Report 2009.  
Annual Report of the CBI for 2009. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14845 
(CBI 2011) Central Bank of Ireland (CBI). 2011. Annual Report 2010.  
Annual report of the CBI for 2010. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14680/ 
(CBI 2012) Central Bank of Ireland (CBI). 2012. Annual Report 2011.  
Annual report of the CBI for 2011. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4468 
(CBI 2013) Central Bank of Ireland (CBI). 2013. Annual Report 2012.  
Annual report of the CBI for 2012. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4469 
(CBI 2014) Central Bank of Ireland (CBI). 2014. Annual Report 2013.  
Annual report of the CBI for 2013. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4470 
(CBI 2024) Central Bank of Ireland (CBI). 2024. Annual Report 2023.  
Annual report of the CBI for 2023. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/15052 
  
289
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 33 ---
(Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs 2015) Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs. 2015. “Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Monetary Dialogue 
with Mario Draghi.” November 12, 2015. 
Transcripts detailing the exchange between the ECB Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs with Mario Draghi, president of the ECB. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4475 
(EC 2008) European Commission (EC). 2008. “State Aid NN 48/2008 - Ireland   Guarantee 
Scheme for Banks in Ireland.” October 13, 2008. 
EC report on the State Aid given to Irish banks. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/14840 
(EC 2009) European Commission (EC). 2009. “State Aid N356/2009 - Recapitalisation of 
Anglo-Irish Bank by the Irish State.” June 26, 2009. 
EC report on the State Aid pertaining to Anglo Irish Bank. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4478 
(Eichengreen 2015) Eichengreen, Barry. 2015. “The Irish Crisis and the EU from a 
Distance.” Book Chapter. Ireland: Lessons from Its Recovery from the Bank-Sovereign Loop, 
2015. 
Report on the aftermath of the Irish banking sector crisis. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/9743 
(Honohan 2010) Honohan, Patrick. 2010. “The Irish Banking Crisis Regulatory and 
Financial Stability Policy 2003-2008.” A Report to the Minister of Finance by the Governor 
of the Central Bank, Central Bank of Ireland, May 31, 2010. 
Report on the Irish banking crisis prepared by the governor of the CBI. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/730/ 
(Honohan 2012) Honohan, Patrick. 2012. “Recapitalisation of Failed Banks - Some Lessons 
from the Irish Experience.” Speech delivered at the 44th Annual Money, Macro and Finance 
Conference, Dublin, July 9, 2012. 
Speech discussing the Irish recapitalization effort. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/10517 
(Honohan 2019) Honohan, Patrick. 2019. Currency, Credit and Crisis: Central Banking in 
Ireland and Europe. London: Cambridge University Press. May 2019. 
Book presenting the functioning of the central banks in Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/3251/ 
(Houses of the Oireachtas 2013) Houses of the Oireachtas. 2013. “NAMA Bonds,” May 9, 
2013. 
Document presenting the discussion in the Irish Parliament about bonds issued by a national 
regulator. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5158 
290
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 34 ---
(Houses of the Oireachtas 2015) Houses of the Oireachtas. 2015. “Report of the Joint 
Committee of Inquiry into the Banking Crisis.” May 21, 2015. 
Transcript of the CBI Governor John Hurley’s discussion with the Joint Committee of Inquiry 
into the Banking Crisis. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4480 
(Houses of the Oireachtas 2016) Houses of the Oireachtas. 2016. “Report of the Joint 
Committee of Inquiry into the Banking Crisis.” January 2016. 
Report prepared by the Irish parliament investigating the Irish banking crisis. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/9803 
(IBRC 2012) Irish Bank Resolution Corporation Limited (IBRC). 2012. “Annual Report & 
Accounts 2011.” 2012. 
Annual report of Ireland’s Resolution unit for the year 2011. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5160 
(IBRC 2014) Irish Bank Resolution Corporation Limited (IBRC). 2014. “Progress Update 
Report.” June 6, 2014. 
Report providing a financial update about the special liquidation of a bank resolution 
company in Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5164 
(IMF 2016) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2016. “Ireland Technical Note on Financial 
Safety Net, Bank Resolution, and Crisis Management.” IMF Country Report No. 16/313, 
September 2016. 
Report providing a financial sector assessment by IMF on Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4481 
(IMF 2022) International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2022. “Ireland Technical Note on Financial 
Safety Net, Bank Resolution, and Crisis Management.” IMF Country Report No. 22/239, July 
2022. 
Report providing a financial sector assessment by IMF on Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4483 
(Kinsella 2011) Kinsella, Stephen. 2011. “Three (and a Bit) Years on from the Banking 
Guarantee.” September 30, 2011. 
Blog post assessing Ireland’s broad based guarantee to the banking sector during the global 
financial crisis. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5157 
(Nyberg 2011) Nyberg, Peter. 2011. “Misjudging Risk: Causes of the Systemic Banking 
Crisis in Ireland.” March 2011. 
Report detailing the investigation into the banking sector in Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/734 
  
291
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 35 ---
(Trichet 2010a) Trichet, Jean-Claude. 2010a. “Letter from the ECB President to the Irish 
Minister of Finance.” October 15, 2010. 
Letter from Jean-Claude Trichet to the Brian Lenihan on the banking system of Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/972 
(Trichet 2010b) Trichet, Jean-Claude. 2010b. “Letter to Brian Lenihan, the Irish Minister of 
Finance.” November 19, 2010. 
Letter from Jean-Claude Trichet to Brian Lenihan on the ELA provided to Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4488 
(Tynan 2020) Tynan, David. 2020. “Determination of Value of Shares Transferred to the 
Minister for Finance and Rights Extinguished under the Anglo Irish Bank Corporation Act 
2009.” Report, April 23, 2020. 
Report that details the methodology of valuation of shares transferred to the Irish finance 
minister. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4489 
Key Academic Papers 
(Arnold 2025) Arnold, Vincient. 2025. “Emergency Liquidity Assistance and Monetary 
Financing in the European Union: A Case Study in Fiscal Cooperation?” Yale Program on 
Financial Stability, Systemic Risk Blog, January 30, 2025. 
Policy note discussing the application of monetary financing regulations on ELA in Europe. 
https://som.yale.edu/story/2025/emergency-liquidity-assistance-and-monetary-
financing-european-union-case-study-fiscal 
(Baudino, Murphy, and Svoronos 2020) Baudino, Patrizia, Diarmuid Murphy, and Jean-
Philippe Svoronos. 2020. “The Banking Crisis in Ireland.” FSI Crisis Management Series, No. 
2, October 27, 2020. 
Study describing the banking crisis in Ireland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/10507 
(Kelly et al. 2025) Kelly, Steven, Vincient Arnold, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2025. 
“Survey of Ad Hoc Emergency Liquidity Programs." Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 1.  
Survey of YPFS case studies examining the provision of ad hoc emergency liquidity.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/3/ 
(Nye 2021) Nye, Alexander. 2021. “National Asset Management Agency (NAMA).” Journal of 
Financial Crises 3, no. 2, June 23, 2021. 
YPFS case study on NAMA. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1162&context=journal-of-
financial-crises 
(Schaefer-Brown 2022) Schaefer-Brown, Stella. 2022. “Ireland: Credit Institution (Financial 
Support) Scheme, 2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 4. 
YPFS case study on Ireland’s guarantee scheme in 2008.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss4/10/  
292
Anglo Irish Bank Gupta et al.

--- Page 36 ---
(Whelan 2012) Whelan, Karl. 2012. “ELA, Promissory Notes and All That: The Fiscal Costs 
of Anglo Irish Bank.” University College Dublin, September 2012. 
Paper detailing the fiscal costs entailed in aid provided to Anglo Irish Bank. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4490 
(Wiggins et al. 2022) Wiggins, Rosalind Z., Sean Fulmer, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew 
Metrick. 2022. “Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, 
no. 2. 
Survey of YPFS case studies examining broad-based emergency liquidity programs. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/3/ 
 
Copyright 2025 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale P rogram on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
293
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1