--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Canada: Canadian Commercial Bank Emergency Liquidity Canada: Canadian Commercial Bank Emergency Liquidity 
Program, 1985 Program, 1985 
Adam Keanie 
Risk Quantification Division, Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada 
Léo Brougher 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Keanie, Adam and Brougher, Léo (2025) "Canada: Canadian Commercial Bank Emergency Liquidity 
Program, 1985," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 128-145. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1615 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/5 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/5

--- Page 3 ---
Canada: Canadian Commercial Bank  
Emergency Liquidity Program, 19851 
Adam Keanie2 and Léo Brougher3 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
April 15, 2025 
Abstract 
In March 1985, the Canadian Commercial Bank (CCB)—Canada’s 10th largest bank, with CAD 
2.9 billion in assets—reported to the Office of the Inspector General of Banks (OIGB) and the 
Bank of Canada (BoC) that CCB would not survive owing to large losses on its U nited States 
energy loans portfolio . In r esponse, the BoC assembled an emergency CAD 255 million 
rescue package, secured through contributions from a consortium composed of the federal 
government, the provincial government  of Alberta , the Canadian Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, and Canada’s six l argest banks. Despite the BoC ’s reassurances, including a 
public announcement promising  virtually unlimited liquidity support , confidence in CCB 
continued to decline. By the time the bank failed, it depended on BoC support for 
approximately 65% of its total outstanding deposits, totaling CAD 1.3 billion. In the summer 
of 1985, as part of a full examination of CCB’s loan book, authorities uncovered a significant 
number of additional impaired loans, confirming that the bank was deeply insolvent. This 
insolvency prompted the OIGB to declare the CCB nonviable on September 1, 1985, marking 
Canada’s first bank failure in 62 years. The c ollapse of CCB triggered forced acquisitions of 
other significant regional banks and led to substantial regulatory reforms in Canada ’s 
financial sector.   
Keywords: ad hoc emergency liquidity, Bank of Canada, Canadian Commercial Bank, Office 
of the Inspector General of Banks 
  
 
1 This case study is part of a Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering ad hoc emergency liquidity provision. A survey of some of the cases in th is series (Kelly 
et al.  2025) and the individual cases underlying it are available from the Journal of Financial Crises  at 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/. Wiggins et al. (2022) surveys broad-
based emergency liquidity programs. 
2 Senior Manager, Risk Quantification Division, Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada.  
3 Research Associate, Yale Program on Financial Stability.  
128

--- Page 4 ---
Overview  
This case study  is about  the ad hoc  
emergency liquidity  the Bank of Canada 
(BoC) provided to the Canadian Commercial 
Bank (CCB) from late March until the end of 
August 1985 . Th is facility was part of  a 
support package for CCB , which included a 
component aimed at restoring solvency ; 
authorities liquidated the bank once the full 
extent of the problems with its loan book 
became apparent  (MacIntosh 1991) . (See 
Estey [1986] for a longer discussion of the 
solvency restoration efforts and the 
associated controversies.) 
CCB faced issues incl uding a concentrated 
loan portfolio, insufficient capital base, 
reliance on wholesale deposits, poor 
lending practices, and dubious accounting 
methods like capitalizing unpaid interest . 
The United States Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC), which supervised CCB’s 
Westlands Bank subsidiary  in California , 
identified these problems in the fall of 1983, 
issuing a “highly critical” report to the bank  
(Estey 1986 , 82 ). To save Westlands  and 
assuage FDIC concerns, CCB injected capital 
and transferred a number of problem loans 
to Los Angeles Agency, another US -based 
CCB subsidiary, which was supervised by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco . In 
February 1985, the Federal Reserve Board 
(Fed) issued a report  in which it deemed a 
portfolio of USD 108 million in 
predominately energy loans “doubtful and 
substandard” (Estey 1986, 82).  
By early 1985, the bank was no longer 
earning a positive net interest margin 
because of  its high proportio n of 
nonperforming loans . T he Estey 
Commission, a federally mandated 
investigation into the collapse of CCB and 
Northland Bank led by Supreme Court  
Key Terms 
Purpose: “To prevent the failure of the particular 
institution which is illiquid but still solvent and to 
preserve confidence in that institution and in other 
deposit-taking institutions and the financial 
system” (Bank of Canada 1986, 2) 
Announcement 
Date 
March 25, 1986  
Operational Date March 25, 1986  
Termination Date September 1, 1986  
Legal Authority Bank of Canada Act § 18(h)  
Administrator Bank of Canada 
Peak Authorization Consortium loan: CAD 255 
million; 
BoC loan: No stated limit; 
75% to 80% of collateral 
book value was a threshold  
Peak Outstanding CAD 1.3 billion from the BoC 
and CAD 255 million from 
the Consortium  
Collateral Canadian and US dollar loan 
portfolios  
Haircut and 
Recourse 
20 to 25%  
Interest Rate and 
Fees 
Not available; described as 
“favourable” (Estey 1986, 
115) 
Term Six months, renewable  
Part of a Package The Department of Finance 
announced the CAD 255 
million emergency rescue 
package from the public-
private consortium and the 
BoC’s availability of liquidity 
in the same press release   
Outcomes The parallel liquidity support 
from the consortium and BoC 
did not stop the exodus of 
depositors and creditors 
from the bank; even the 
consortium banks reduced 
their business with CCB; 
 
(continued) 
 
129
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Justice Willard Estey, stated retrospectively, 
“No bank in this condition had a future and 
the CCB was no exception ” (Estey 1986 , 
102). On March 14, 1985, CCB CEO Gerr y 
McLaughlan flew to Ottawa to make 
unannounced presentations to officials at the 
BoC and the Office of the Inspector General 
of Banks ( OIGB)—the Canadian bank 
supervisor at the time—in which he said the 
bank would not survive unless the 
government provided it “massive assistance” 
(Estey 1986 , 105 ). Canadian authorities 
feared the prospect of a “tidal wave effect” on 
similarly situated regional financial institutions  (Estey 1986, 107 ). They were also aware 
that the bank was “hopelessly insolvent,” as it faced immediate write-offs of CAD 244 million4 
against CAD 130 million of capital  (Estey 1986, 111). The CCB’s management  proposed a 
rescue plan involving the “purchase of the aggregate loan losses ” of CAD 244 million by the 
Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC) in exchange for share warrants and a 50% 
share of future profits until the funds were repaid  (Estey 1986, 108). The CDIC at the time 
insured bank deposits up to CAD 60,000 per depositor. “Purchasing losses” meant obtaining 
a claim on a junior tranche of a CAD 530 million pool of nonperforming loans  (Estey 1986, 
492).  
Following an assessment of the nonperforming loan pool, between March 2 2–24, 1985, 
Canadian authorities  negotiated a modified version of the CCB plan with the intent of  
restoring CCB to viability. A consortium of the government of Canada, the government of 
Alberta, the CDIC, and the six largest Canadian banks announced on Monday, March 25, a 
support package consisting of a CAD 255 million loan to CCB, along with further liquidity 
support from the BoC as needed. This action preserved the assets side of CCB’s balance sheet. 
The OIGB explained in correspondence to the Department of Finance: “upon completion of 
the transaction, the Bank will receive [CAD] 255 million in cash and reduce the carrying value 
of its loan portfolio. There will be no other changes to the balance sheet of the Bank ” (Estey 
1986, 496). However, it is not clear how the CCB described the consortium package on the 
liabilities side of its balance sheet—as a loan or a type of equity —since CCB’s balance sheet 
for that period is not available. In the view of Justice Estey, “the [CAD] 255M, by the terms of 
the interim and final agreements, remains an obligation in debt of the CCB ” (Estey 1986, 
115). This loan was  contingent upon the debenture holders agreeing to subordinate their 
claims to the advances made by the parties involved in the rescue program  and the 
conditions of the repayment program called on the CCB to pay back 50% of its pretax profits 
to the consortium members until the capital on the refinancing deal was repaid in full (Estey 
1986; LA Times 1985).   
Immediately following the March 25 announcement of the support package, a number of CCB 
counterparties cancelled or declined to renew contingent lines of credit. The BoC said in an 
 
4 According to FRED, USD 1 = CAD 1.39 on March 14, 1985.  
Outcomes 
(continued) 
Liquidity support kept the 
bank operational for five 
months before its failure, 
which resulted in large 
government losses, a 
moderate banking crisis, and 
changes to Canadian 
financial supervision  
Notable Features The BoC did not place any 
restrictions upon the bank, 
accepted unassessed loans as 
collateral, and relied on OIGB 
for monitoring 
130
Canadian Commercial Bank Keanie and Brougher

--- Page 6 ---
April 18 press release  that it was “ready to provide the Canadian Commercial Bank with 
whatever amount of liquidity support it may require” (Estey 1986, 500). The CCB’s Canadian 
and US performing loan portfolios were used as collateral for the BoC’s liquidity support, in 
two stages. Initially, the Canadian loan portfolio was pledged, followed by the US loan 
portfolio after the full extent of the bank ’s liquidity needs became apparent . There was no 
formal cap on lending against this, but the BoC stated afterward it was willing to lend at least 
75% to 80% of the collateral’s book value (Bank of Canada 1986). The BoC relied on the OIGB 
for assessing the CCB ’s collateral; the OIGB, for its p art, mostly relied on external auditors 
hired by the CCB for its assessments (Estey 1986). 
In May and June 1985, a team  led by the manager of the Toronto -Dominion Edmonton 
commercial branch and a vice president of the BoC inspected CCB’s nonperforming loans and 
concluded around CAD 50 million in additional provisions would be needed. Following this 
inspection, the heads of the six support group banks 5 met with the minister of finance and 
emphasized the need to determine whether the bank was solvent . In a final inspection of 
CCB’s loans, George Hitchman, a retired deputy chairman of the board of the Bank of Nova 
Scotia, concluded over the summer of 1985 that there could be as much as CAD 500 million 
of further write-downs needed. On August 13, the CCB admit ted that it would be insolvent 
by the end of the  fiscal year without further government assistance . After this point, 
following some deliberations on the options for resolving the bank, the authorities 
determined to liquidate CCB on September 1, 1985 (Estey 1986). 
One immediate consequence of CCB ’s failure was the decision to also liquidate Northland 
Bank, which was a smaller bank in a comparable, although less severe, condition (Estey 
1986). Subsequently, the loss of depositor confidence in  other regional Canadian banks 
resulted in “the virtual elimination of regional banks in Canada ” through mergers and 
acquisitions (MacIntosh 1991, 225 –226). The government of Canada effectively accepted 
responsibility for misleading investors as to the state of CCB and Northland and passed 
legislation agreeing to compensate all depositors, both insured and uninsured, with the CDIC 
paying out a total of approximately CAD 906 million  across the entire banking sector in 1985 
(CDIC 1986; CDIC 2016; MacIntosh 1991).  
No information was found on whether the participating banks and government were paid 
back for the consortium loan.  
At the end of 1986, the BoC’s outstanding advances to CCB stood at CAD 481 million, down 
from CAD 1 .1 b illion at the end of 1985 (Bank of Canada 19 87). By the end of 1988, the 
outstanding combined advances paid out by the BoC to both CCB and Northland Bank stood 
at CAD 143 million (Bank of Canada 1989).  
  
 
5 These comprised the six largest Canadian chartered banks: the Royal Bank of Canada, the Toronto -Dominion 
Bank, the Bank of Montreal, the Bank of Nova Scotia, the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce and the National 
Bank of Canada. 
131
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1: Timeline of the CCB Failure  
Date Event  
Fall 1983 FDIC issues highly critical report to CCB’s California-based Westlands Bank subsidiary; CCB 
recapitalizes subsidiary and transfers bad loans to Los Angeles Agency, another CCB 
subsidiary 
Feb. 1985 Fed issues report on USD 108 million of “doubtful and substandard” loans at the Los Angeles 
Agency; many of these loans are now transferred to the CCB parent entity 
March 14, 1985 CCB CEO Gerry McLaughlan flies to Ottawa to make an unannounced presentation to officials 
at the OIGB and BoC; he says the bank will not survive without “massive assistance” 
March 22–24, 
1985 
The BoC, the government of Canada, the government of Alberta, and the six largest Canadian 
chartered banks negotiate through the weekend to devise a rescue plan 
March 25, 1985 CCB Support Package group announces support package that includes “purchasing” CAD 255 
million of nonperforming loans to restore solvency along with BoC liquidity support 
April 18, 1985 BoC announces that it is “ready to provide the Canadian Commercial Bank with whatever 
amount of liquidity support it may require” to restore confidence among fleeing wholesale 
depositors 
Aug. 1985 An inspection of CCB’s performing loan books concludes that there could be as much as CAD 
500 million of further write-downs required, an amount far greater than the bank ’s capital 
Sept. 1, 1985 OIGB declares CCB nonviable; the BoC ceases to provide liquidity advances; and the minister 
of finance appoints a curator and places CCB into liquidation 
Dec. 20, 1985 The Parliament of Canada passes the Financial Institutions Depositors Compensation Act , 
providing full compensation for uninsured depositors of CCB and Northland Bank 
Sources: Estey 1986; authors’ analysis.  
Summary Evaluation 
The BoC’s liquidity support program allowed CCB to fund itself for more than five months 
until the bank was declared nonviable by the OIGB, at which point the BoC ceased to provide 
liquidity advances. The BoC’s justification for the liquidity support to CCB was predicated on 
the OIGB’s repeated assertion that CCB was solvent and viable. In its submission to the Estey 
Commission, t he BoC stated that it did not have the power to make assessments on the 
solvency and viability of banks and relied on the OIGB by necessity (Bank of Canada 1986).  
The Estey Commission, which reviewed CCB ’s failure, recommended that “the present 
statutory provision requiring publication of liquidity advances by the Bank of Canada be 
repealed” (Estey 1986, 342). The BoC, in its submission to the Commission, did not take a 
view on whether it should publish information about liquidity advances. It described the 
argument for confidentiality but then also noted: “The funds advanced are public funds and 
the public is entitled to information on the manner in which those funds are utilized ” (Bank 
of Canada 1986, 24–25).  
The Estey Commission placed much of the blame for the failure of CCB and Northland Bank 
on the weaknesses in Canada’s banking supervisory and regulatory system. Specifically, the 
132
Canadian Commercial Bank Keanie and Brougher

--- Page 8 ---
Commission found that the Canadian bank supervisory model—where regulatory oversight 
was shared among the OIGB, CDIC, and BoC—lacked cohesion, direct oversight of banks’ loan 
portfolios, and an effective enforcement mechanism to address emerging risks. In particular, 
the OIGB’s inability to respond decisively to early warning signals from the troubled banks 
was highlighted as a fundamental flaw (Estey 1986). In response, the Canadian government 
established the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI), which aimed at 
addressing some of the recommendations by combining the OIGB and Department of 
Insurance with the powers to supervise and re gulate all federal ly regulated financial 
institutions (OSFI n.d.; Parliament of Canada 1987). 
In November 1985, a  House of Commons committee recommended that bank supervisors 
should set limits on the liquidity support the BoC may provide to financial institutions, noting 
that:  
Recent developments have demonstrated that the market may react precipitously 
and adversely to any bank receiving liquidity support from the Bank of Canada. 
Liquidity support has tended to erode public confidence in an institution. J ustifiably 
or not, the Committee believes that when public confidence in a deposit -taking 
institution becomes visible shaken, the supervisor should take remedial action to 
rectify any weaknesses there may be or restore public confidence  (House of 
Commons 1985, 34). 
A Senate committee said in December 1985 that it was “concerned with the apparent alacrity 
with which the Bank of Canada is prepared to make advances to troubled banks ” (Little 
1985). 
The committee concluded that the CCB bailout:  
was doomed from the outset because the financial condition of the bank was materially 
worse than that on which the package was premised. Members of the committee are 
divided on the issue of whether the Government ought to have known this before the 
package was negotiated (Little 1985). 
133
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Deposit Insurance Dataset; World Bank Global Financial Development Database.  
 
134
Canadian Commercial Bank Keanie and Brougher

--- Page 10 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: The purpose of the BoC liquidity provision was t o preserve confidence 
in the bank and Canada’s financial system and prevent contagion. 
In the years l eading up to the CCB collapse , large losses among Canadian banks stemming 
from lending to develop ing countries,6 oil shocks, and the mass failure of trust companies7 
had weakened the domestic financial system (Kobrak and Martin 2018). Since its founding 
in 1976, the CCB had embarked on a rapid expansion in Western Canada  and then into 
California and Eastern Canada (Estey 1986).  
After some initial success, problems began to emerge for CCB owing to the generally poor 
performance of its loan book and the onset in 1982 of a deep and prolonged recession in 
Western Canada (Estey 1986). In 1983, CCB first requested liquidity support from the BoC 
because of its associations with failing trust companies. The BoC agreed in late January 
1983 to provide extraordinary advances to CCB if needed and took security collateral 
for that purpose. The BoC also convened a meeting with the six largest Canadian 
chartered banks —the Royal Bank of Canada, the Tor onto-Dominion Bank, the Bank of 
Montreal, the Bank of Nova Scotia, the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce , and the 
National Bank of Canada —to arrange a special line of credit for CCB, which CCB drew 
upon to survive the episode without need of the BoC facility (Bank of Canada 1986). CCB 
repaid all borrowings to the banks by June 1983. CCB survived that episode. By the end of 
1984, it had a loan portfolio of CAD 2.3 billion (Estey 1986).  
By early 1985, CCB was no longer earning a positive net interest margin owing to its high 
proportion of nonperforming loans. Further, its cash income had dried up, leaving the bank 
without a viable future. On March 14, 1985, CCB CEO Gerry McLaughlan flew t o Ottawa to 
make unannounced presentations to officials at the B oC and the OIGB, in which he said the 
bank would not survive unless the government provided it “massive assistance” (Estey 1986, 
105).  
The CCB CEO presented the government with three options : recapitalization, merger, or 
liquidation (Estey 1986).  The Canadian authorities did consider liquidating the bank and a 
prospective merger with an acquiring institution, recognizing the latter option would also 
likely require government support . In particular, National Bank, Canada ’s sixth -largest 
bank, was considered as a potential acquirer, but this possibility was dismissed for 
political reasons (Johnson 1986).  
 
6 These countries included Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, and Nigeria. 
7 Canadian trust companies were lightly regulated entities permitted to engage in certain banking activities. By 
the time of the CCB rescue, risky lending practices and an unfavorable interest rate environment had led to the 
failure of 10 notable trust companies requiring CDIC payouts totalling more than CAD 3 billion ( Macintosh 
1991).  
135
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
The CDIC, which participated in the consortium package, also decided it was important 
to support the intervention, noting that participating in the rescue attempt would limit 
risk or “avert the loss which it would face if the CCB failed” (CDIC 1986, 8).  
Canadian officials feared that the failure of CCB could spark a broader liquidity crisis for two 
main reasons. Most significantly, there were a number of similarly vulnerable regional banks 
in Western Canada.8 They also had concerns about the potential impact on interbank funding 
markets and the risk of international depositors and investors losing confidence in Canadian 
banks (Estey 1986). BoC Governor Gerald Bouey was a particularly strong advocate for the 
CCB rescue, despite skepticism expressed by some  other government officials. Ultimately, 
concerns about potential negative impacts on the already struggling economy in Western 
Canada tipped the balance in favor of proceeding with the rescue of CCB (Johnson 1986). 
According to the BoC,  
it was crucial that the Bank of Canada be in a position to provide advances promptly to 
the Canadian Commercial Bank to prevent its failure due to lack of liquidity and to help 
maintain market confidence in similar institutions that mig ht have been susceptible to 
contagion problems (Bank of Canada 1986, 9). 
In the BoC’s submission to the Estey Commission, the BoC clearly explained its thinking 
on its role as lender of last resort: 
Extraordinary advances are intended to prevent the failur e of the particular 
institution that is illiquid but still solvent and to preserve confidence in that 
institution and in other deposit -taking institutions and the financial system. This 
latter concern is sometimes referred to as the “contagion” problem, wh ere the 
difficulties of one deposit -taking financial institution may lead to a general market 
concern that other deposit-taking financial institutions could be subject to the same 
problems, thus putting the stability of the financial system as a whole at r isk. 
Depositors have a considerable incentive to withdraw their funds from an 
institution when they believe, whether justified or not, that the institution is 
experiencing difficulties . . . .  When depositors see that there are no problems in 
obtaining thei r funds, that their initial concerns are unfounded and that the 
institution is continuing to operate without difficulty, confidence should return.  
Losses of confidence can develop and spread with great speed and, for extraordinary 
advances to be effective,  the central bank must be prepared to lend quickly and 
without hesitation (Bank of Canada 1986, 2–3). 
 
8 The institutions of concern did indeed encounter problems after CCB’s collapse and either failed or merged 
with other banks despite a government bailout of uninsured CCB depositors (Macintosh 1991). 
136
Canadian Commercial Bank Keanie and Brougher

--- Page 12 ---
2. Part of a Package: The consortium loan and the BoC’s liquidity support to CCB 
were part of the same support package, announced by the Department of Finance 
in March 1985.  
The consortium loan and the BoC’s liquidity support to CCB were announced as part of a 
single support package. The first component of this package was an injection of cash into 
CCB from a consortium that includ ed the Canadian federal government, Alberta provincial 
government, the CDIC, and the six largest Canadian banks. This action involved purchasing 
the losses on a CAD 530 million pool of nonperforming loans by buying a junior claim at a 
par value of CAD 255 million; the intended purpose of this was to allow the CCB to write  off 
large losses while remaining solvent. This loan was  contingent upon the agreement of the 
debenture holders to subordinate their claims to the advances made by the parties involved 
in the rescue program , and it required the CCB to pay back 50% of its pretax profits to the 
consortium members until the capital on the refinancing deal was repaid in full (Estey 1986; 
LA Times 1985).   
However, there was some disagreement over the nature of the CAD 255 million participation 
by the consortium. Estey contended that the CAD 255 million was “simply a liquidity 
advance, “since  the final participation agreement would still require CCB to repay the 
consortium members in the event of its own liqui dation (Estey 1986, 125).9 Estey wrote,  
“The Inspector General, therefore, was in error in finding the bank to be solvent upon receipt 
of the $255 M” (Estey 1986, 115 ). The day after CCB failed, Alberta ’s provincial treasurer 
called its CAD 70 million participation in the consortium a deposit, for which he expected full 
recovery (Legislative Assembly of Alberta 1985). In 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that the 
consortium’s participation ranked pari passu  with other unse cured creditors (Supreme 
Court of Canada 1992). 
In addition to the CAD 255 million cash injection, t he governments of Canada, Alberta, and 
British Columbia also purchased CAD 39 million subordinated debentures at par value from 
the investors who held them,  in three equal tranches  (Estey 1986). These debentures had 
little value, since they were subordinated to the claims held by the consortium members. 
Beyond these measures, the BoC sought to bolster confidence by exercising  moral suasion 
when the largest C anadian chartered banks began to withdraw lines of credit to CCB. On 
April 10, Governor Bouey met with representatives from the six largest Canadian banks—
the same banks that had participated in CCB ’s recapitalization —to express concerns that 
their reluctance to conduct regular business with CCB was undermining market confidence. 
In late May, with the minister of finance’s support, Governor Bouey personally wrote to each 
of the six major chartered banks imploring them to resume  normal relations  with CCB. 
Despite Governor Bouey’s appeals, it is not apparent that banks resumed regular business 
 
 
 
9 Estey (1986) also wrote, “It is surprising that the ‘rescue’ moneys of $255M were simply paid through the CCB 
to the Bank of Canada in reduction of liquidity advances” (115). 
137
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
with CCB, with the president of the Royal Bank of C anada stating that confidence could not 
be restored as CCB continued to draw from the BoC (Estey 1986). 
3. Legal Authority: The  BoC granted liquidity support  under Section 18(h) of the 
Bank of Canada Act. 
According to the Bank of Canada Act , the BoC could “make loans or advances for periods of 
not more than six months  to any member of the Canadian Payments Association ” upon 
receipt of eligible security including mortgages (Parliament of Canada 1985b, sec. 18). These 
loans or advances were eligible to be renewed (Estey 1986).  
In its submission to the Estey Commission, the BoC described two types of liquidity support 
allowed under the Bank of Canada Act: ordinary, one -day advances to banks encountering 
temporary reserve shortfalls, and  extraordinary advances to “banks which are experiencing 
difficult liquidity problems because of a loss of depositor confidence and are unable to meet 
deposit withdrawals from their own resources ( that is , selling liquid assets) or from 
additional deposits raised in the m arket at or near their usual rates of interest ” (Bank of 
Canada 1986, 2).  
While the BoC stated that solvency of an institution was a precondition for such advances, 
they asserted they lacked the legislative authority and capacity to “assess the financial 
soundness and solvency of chartered banks ” and hence relied upon the OIGB by necessity 
for such assessments (Bank of Canada 1986, 4).  
The CDIC Act gave the CDIC the authority to provide emergency liquidity funding to deposit-
taking institutions and to ass ist in improving the regulation of such  institutions, but it did 
not invoke these authorities in the CCB case (Estey 1986). 
4. Administration: The Bank of Canada administered the provision of its liquidity 
advances with limited constraints and in consultation with the OIGB. 
Following the announcement of liquidity support, the BoC made logistical arrangements 
pertaining to CCB ’s liquidity needs (Bank of Canada 1986) . The BoC maintained 
communication with the OIGB during various inspections of CCB ’s loans and continued to 
lend when the report written in August 1985 by George Hitchman, a retired deputy chairman 
of the board of the Bank of Nova Scotia , described the condition of CCB as very serious. B y 
mid-August, the BoC believed that CCB was heading t oward insolvency; however, it 
continued providing liquidity advances until September 1, 1985, when it received a letter 
from Inspector General Kennett stating that CCB was no longer viable  (Bank of Canada 
1986).  
5. Governance: The BoC consulted with the minister of finance, who had the power 
to override BoC decisions.  
To provide oversight, t he BoC has a board of directors , which includes the deputy minister 
of finance as a nonvoting member , and the BoC is ultimately accountable to the Canadian 
minister of finance (Parliament of Canada 1985a, sec. 5). The BoC needs to consult with the 
138
Canadian Commercial Bank Keanie and Brougher

--- Page 14 ---
minister of finance , who  has the right to issue overriding directives in the case of 
disagreements on issues of monetary policy (Parliament of Canada 1985a, sec. 14).  
Within a month of the collapse of CCB and Northland Bank, the government commissioned a 
special inquiry report into the circumstances of these failures led by Supreme Court Judge 
Willard Estey (Estey 1986; Kobrak and Martin 2018, 265) . Shortly thereafter, in December 
1985, the Canadian parliament passed the Financial Institutions Depositors Compensation 
Act to provide compensation to all uninsured depositors at an initially estimated cost of CAD 
875 million (Estey 1986). The circumstances surrounding the CCB collapse led to sweeping 
regulatory changes, including the creation of the OSFI, which subsumed the OIGB and 
Department of Insurance , and was given a  strengthened mandate to provide effective 
supervision of banks and insurance companies (Kobrak and Martin 2018, 265). 
6. Communication and Disclosure : In press releases about CCB, the BoC conveyed 
confidence, while BoC Governor Bouey used moral suasion with CCB 
counterparties.  
During CCB ’s problems in January 1983 resulting from  associations with failing trust 
companies, the BoC issued a press release stating: “Canadian Commercial Bank is a solvent 
and profitable bank and if it requires any liquidity support, the Bank of Canada will provide 
it” (Estey 1986 , 165 –66). When problems re -emerged in March 1985, Governor Bouey 
advocated for a rescue of CCB and led negotiations during the crucial days of March 22–24, 
despite the BoC not being a contributor to those funds (Estey 1986; Johnson 1986). 
Coming out of the weekend, on March 25, 1985 , the Department of Finance  issued a press 
release announcing the consortium’s support package for CCB, clearly stating the imperative 
to protect the bank, the Western Canadian economy, and the domestic financial system. The 
Department of Finance described the support package as “an infusion of capital with 
repayment provisions,” contributed by the Province of Alberta, six Canadian banks, the CDIC, 
and the federal government to restore the CCB ’s solvency  (Estey 1986 , 499 ). It also 
announced the availability of liquidity support for CCB and an overall accommodative stance 
for emergency lending: “the Bank of Canada stands ready to provide liquidity for Canadian 
Commercial Bank, if requested, as well as for any other Canadian bank ” (Estey 1986, 499). 
This emergency liquidity assistance began almost immediately for CCB and reached CAD 492 
million, or 40% of the ir Canadian dollar loan portfolio, by mid -April 1985 (Bank of Canada 
1986). 
As the CCB continued to experience a loss of depositors and wholesale funding after the 
announcement of the support package, on April 18 the BoC issued the following press release 
to bolster confidence: 
. . . with the agreement of the Canadian Commercial Bank, the Governor, Mr. Gerald K. 
Bouey, confirmed that the Bank of Canada has been providing liquidity support to that 
chartered bank. The Governor noted that it is the role of the central bank to act as an 
ultimate source of liquidity for Canadian banks, and he reiterated that the Bank of 
139
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
Canada stands ready to provide the Canadian Commercial Bank with whatever amount 
of liquidity support it may require (Estey 1986, 500). 
While the BoC identified CCB by name, at the time, the BoC published recipients of liquidity 
advances in weekly and monthly reports, so information about its support to CCB would have 
been publicly available regardless of press releases (Estey 1986).  
7. Source and Size of Funding: The liquidity advances to CCB did not have a firm cap 
and peaked at CAD 1.3 billion, accounting for 65% of the bank’s total funding. 
The BoC’s April 18, 1985 , press release indicated that liquidity advances to the CCB would 
be provided at whatever level the CCB required (Estey 1986). The BoC stated that it accepts 
loans as security at book value and that as “the composition of a loan portfolio changes over 
time and the valuation of individual loans is subject to considerable fluctuation, the Bank of 
Canada’s approach has been to take as security a floating charge against the total loan 
portfolio” (Bank of Canada 1986, 5–6). The BoC was providing approximately 65% of CCB’s 
funding at the time the bank collapsed at over CAD 1.3 billion as shown in Figure 2 (Estey 
1986). In its submission to the Estey Commission, the BoC indicated that if funding reached 
75% to 80% of the book value of supporting collateral it would have triggered further action 
to assess the quality of the pledged loan portfolios (Bank of Canada 1986).  
Figure 2: BoC 1985 Liquidity Advances to CCB 
Source: Estey 1986. 
140
Canadian Commercial Bank Keanie and Brougher

--- Page 16 ---
8. Rates and Fees: The rate charged to CCB was not disclosed,  but the government-
appointed commission reviewing CCB’s collapse described the BoC lending rates  
as “favourable.” 
The Estey report describes the rate charged on liquidity advances to CCB as “favourable” and 
conducive toward earning positive net interest margins on new loans. Northland Bank, a 
similar bank also borrowing from the BoC at the same time, paid a lower rate of interest on 
its BoC advances relative to comparable lines of credit at the large Can adian banks (Estey 
1986, 115). 
9. Loan Duration: The BoC loans had a renewable term of up to six months but there 
was no indication the BoC expected repayment within a specific timeframe. 
The Bank of Canada Act permits the BoC to issue loans or advances for d urations up to six 
months, with the option for renewal (Parliament of Canada 1985a, sec. 18). Our research did 
not uncover the term for the loans that were made, but all BoC lending was subject to a 
renewable six-month maximum. As indicated in Figure 2, although total advances  to CCB  
increased over time on average, during certain periods it declined.  In its submission to the 
Estey Commission, the BoC stated that  with extraordinary advances it “stands prepared to 
provide any liquidity support required although it naturally expects the borrowing bank to 
take action, as soon as possible, to reduce its reliance on Bank of Canada advances” (Bank of 
Canada 1986). 
10. Balance Sheet Protection: Liquidity advances were secured by CCB’s Canadian and 
US loan portfolios. 
The BoC said that it required liquidity advances to be fully secured. Its normal practice was 
to secure short-term advances to chartered banks with government securities; however, for 
larger, longer-term advances in exceptional circumstances, it could secure advances against 
a bank ’s loan portfolio if marketable securities were insufficient  (Bank of Canada 1986) . 
Shortly following the announcement of the support package in late March 1985 , the CCB 
signed a legal agreement with the BoC for the assignment of its Canadian loan book as 
collateral. By early April , it became clear that the bank’s liquidity needs would increase 
significantly, and, in mid -April, the CCB signed another agreement to pledge its US loan 
portfolio as additional collateral. Internally, the BoC had established a benchmark of “75 to 
80% of the book value of collateral” as a “reasonable checkpoint” for demarcating when the 
sufficiency of collateral for further lending might need to be re -evaluated (Bank of Canada  
1986).  
11. Impact on Monetary Policy Transmission: The BOC appeared to sterilize  
emergency liquidity by reducing its holdings of government securities. 
In the BoC ’s submission to the judicial inquiry into the failure of CCB and Northland Bank, 
the BoC gave no indication that its actions had any impact on the transmission of monetary 
policy (Bank of Canada 1986). The failure of CCB in September 1985 led to significant strain 
in the financial system , with three of the 10 largest remaining banks (Mercantile Bank, the 
Bank of British Columbia, and the Continental Bank ) being taken over by other Canadian 
141
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
banks (Kobrak and Martin 2018) . Accordingly, BoC advances to troubled institutions 
continued to increase after the failure of CCB and peaked at approximately CAD 5.2 billion in 
March 1986 (BoC data; author’s analysis). For the duration of this stressed period in the mid-
1980s, there were no unusual changes in the growth of the BoC ’s balance sheet or in the 
quantum of reserve liabilities. The BoC appeared to sterilize liquidity advances to banks by 
offsetting reductions in holdings of government of Canada securities (see Figure 3). 
Figure 3: Changes to the Size and Composition of Assets on the BoC Balance Sheet , 
1980–1989  
 
Source: BoC balance sheet data; authors’ analysis. 
12. Other Conditions: There were no additional terms imposed on CCB. 
According to the Estey Commission, in July 1985 “[t]he Bank of Canada objected to 
Northland’s use of liquidity advances to finance new loans ” (Estey 1986, 578). As the BoC 
discouraged new lending activity at Northland Bank during the same timeframe at which 
CCB was receiving large advances, it is possible that similar discouragement was directed at 
CCB, but there was no explicit mention of this in the literature.  The Estey Report also noted 
that the BoC did not require a change in the CCB management team, a stipulation that  was 
common practice in other jurisdictions (Estey 1986). 
  
142
Canadian Commercial Bank Keanie and Brougher

--- Page 18 ---
References and Key Program Documents 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(Legislative Assembly of Alberta 1985) Legislative Assembly of Alberta. 1985. “Heritage 
Savings Trust Fund Act,” September 4, 1985. 
Transcript of a meeting of the Standing Committee on the Alberta Heritage Savings Trust 
Fund Act. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5326 
(Parliament of Canada 1985a) Parliament of Canada. 1985a. Bank of Canada Act. 
Canadian law establishing the BoC and outlining its purpose and powers. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/11497 
(Parliament of Canada 1985b) Parliament of Canada. 1985b. Canadian Commercial Bank 
Financial Assistance Act. 
Canadian law authorizing the minister of finance to enter into agreements to provide 
financial assistance to the CCB. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5331 
(Parliament of Canada 1987) Parliament of Canada. 1987. “Office of the Superintendent of 
Financial Institutions Act,” July 2, 1987. 
The act establishing the OSFI. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5361 
(Supreme Court of Canada 1992) Supreme Court of Canada. 1992. “Canada Deposit 
Insurance Corp. v. Canadian Commercial Bank,” November 19, 1992. 
Supreme court decision on Canada Deposit Insurance Corp v Canadian Commercial Bank 
trial. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5363 
Media Stories 
(Little 1985) Little, Bruce. 1985. “Report Leaves Ministers Unscathed Senators Spread 
Blame for Bank Failures.” The Globe and Mail, December 20, 1985. 
News article discussing the report on the collapse of the Canadian Commercial Bank and the 
Northland Bank. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5328 
(LA Times 1985) Los Angeles Times (LA Times). 1985. “Canada Moves to Bail Out Troubled 
Bank.” March 26, 1985. 
News article about the consortium of banks that provided a bail out to CCB. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5325 
  
143
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
Reports/Assessments 
(Bank of Canada 1986) Bank of Canada. 1986. “Submission of the Bank of Canada to The 
Commission of Inquiry on Certain Banking Operations.”  
The BoC’s submission to the Estey Commission pertaining to their involvement with CCB and 
Northland Bank. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5316 
(Bank of Canada 1987) Bank of Canada. 1987. Annual Report of the Governor to the 
Minister of Finance and Statement of Accounts for the Year 1986, January 31, 1987. 
BoC Annual Report for 1987. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5317 
(Bank of Canada 1989) Bank of Canada. 1989. Annual Report of the Governor to the 
Minister of Finance and Statement of Accounts for the Year 1988, February 28, 1989. 
BoC Annual Report 1988. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5318 
(CDIC 1986) Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC). 1986. Annual Report 1985, 
March 27, 1986. 
CDIC annual report for 1985. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5359 
(CDIC 2016) Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC). 2016. “An Overview of CDIC’s 
History and Evolution: 1967-2015,” 2016. 
Report on the history and evolution of the CDIC. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5319 
(Estey 1986) Estey, Willard Z. 1986. “Report of the Inquiry into the Collapse of the CCB and 
the Northern Bank,” 1986. 
Report of the federally mandated Estey Commmission, which investigated the bank failures. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5320 
(House of Commons 1985) House of Commons. 1985. “Canadian Financial Institutions: 
Report to the Standing Committee on Finance, Trade and Economic Affairs,” November 
1985. 
A report on the Canadian banking sector from the Standing Committee on Finance, Trade, 
and Economic Affairs. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5322 
(MacIntosh 1991) MacIntosh, Robert. 1991. Different Drummers: Banking and Politics in 
Canada. Toronto: Macmillan Canada. 
Book discussing the evolution of the Canadian banking system. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5329 
  
144
Canadian Commercial Bank Keanie and Brougher

--- Page 20 ---
Key Academic Papers. 
(Johnson 1986) Johnson, Arthur. 1986. Breaking the Banks. First Edition. Toronto: Lester & 
O. Dennys. 
Book investigating the failures of CCB and Northland Banks. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5323 
(Kelly et al. 2025) Kelly, Steven, Vincient Arnold, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2025. 
“Survey of Ad Hoc Emergency Liquidity Programs." Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 1.  
Survey of YPFS case studies examining the provision of ad hoc emergency liquidity.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/3/ 
(Kobrak and Martin 2018) Kobrak, Christopher, and Joe Martin. 2018. From Wall Street to 
Bay Street: The Origins and Evolution of American and Canadian Finance. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press. 
Book describing the historical evolution of the Canadian and American financial systems. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5324 
(Wiggins et al. 2022) Wiggins, Rosalind Z., Sean Fulmer, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew 
Metrick. 2022. “Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, 
no. 2: 86–178. 
Survey of YPFS case studies examining broad-based emergency liquidity programs. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/3 
Other 
(OSFI n.d.) Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI). n.d. “Our Timeline.” 
Accessed March 11, 2025. 
Timeline of the significant events in the history of the OSFI. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5362 
 
Copyright 2025 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale  Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
 
 
145
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1