--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Giorgio Gobbi Lessons Learned: Giorgio Gobbi 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Giorgio Gobbi," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 
715-717. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1640 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/30 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/30

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Giorgio Gobbi 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Giorgio Gobbi joined the Economic Research Department of the Bank of Italy in 1990 and was 
assigned to carry out analysis and research on the banking industry. From 1998 to 2004, he 
headed the department’s Financial Intermediaries Office and represented the bank at the 
International Monetary Fund, the Bank of International Settlements, and the European Central 
Bank. Starting in 2007, Gobbi headed the Financial Structure and Intermediaries Divisi on 
within the bank’s Structural Economic Analysis Department. He was appointed deputy head of 
the Financial Stability Unit in 2013 and became head of the Financial Stability Directorate in 
2014. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview with Gobbi conducted in August 
2022; the full transcript may be accessed here. 
Don’t be constrained by linear thinking or static models. Events will move faster than 
expected and in new ways. Look for contagion channels across sectors and in the real 
economy.  
The Global Financial Crisis  of 2007–09 (GFC) challenged Italian economists who were 
focused on the state of their economy and banking  system instead of issues outside their 
borders. Italy did not have the same exposure to subprime mortgages or derivatives that 
some other European countries, such as Spain or the United Kingd om, had . However, its 
banking system did experience an expansion of cre dit in the period leading up to the GFC, 
especially in nonresidential real estate and the building sector. The nation’s banks supplied 
credit to a wide swath of businesses, especially small ones that did not survive the crisis and 
the recession that followed. Credit defaults among those businesses jeopardized the stability 
and flow of liquidity in the banking sector. 
Gobbi recall s that linear thinking —focusing on residential mortgages and derivatives 
originating in the United States—obstructed the Italian economists’ view of the debt crisis 
looming on their banks’ balance sheets.  
We didn ’t have a subprime [market] because we had a very underdeveloped 
residential real estate market. In Italy, 80% of the households owned the house in 
which they live, and [the residential real estate market] was not really big. We started 
to have a market there, and it was nonresidential. Well, bank lending was growing at 
a fast pace for nonresidential real estate. It was just the construction sector and 
developers that were financed. It was not big numbers, nothing was seen as so great, 
but our financial system was based entirely on b anks’ finances. When financ ial 
lending to other sectors was slowing down —because there was a period of low 
growth when firms other than the ones in the construction sector were not investing 
very much—there was a sort of concentration of exposures in the banking portfolios, 
in the banking balance sheets, toward firms involved in real estate activities. 
715

--- Page 4 ---
The exposure was nothing like other countries, but we did have our problem in real 
estate. This is one thing that we were aware of then. But looking at what was going on 
in the United States, the United Kingdom, for most of the time the focus was 
residential real estate. Residential real estate was seen as something not so [troubling 
to us]. In the United States it was so, it was so in the United Kingdom. The point is that 
when the big crisis came, the big recession came, and we had the correction in house 
prices and also in nonresidential property prices, the banks paid a high cost for the 
exposure, because many, many small firms in the construction sector went out of 
market. This was a pain we had among many other banks. 
Because of that failure to see beyond the immediate markers of the looming crisis  to the 
possible impacts on its banks, Italy was caught somewhat unprepared for the recession that 
developed and dovetailed with the European Sovereign Debt Crisis that started in 2011.   
What I think that we really missed is that the development of the events can be very 
nonlinear. If I go back to 2007, 2008, and 2009, still we see that we arrive at 2008, the 
last quarter of the crisis, and a few months before, we still don ’t see that they have 
some big sho ck or some disruption. We were always thinking in a linear way. We 
didn’t take into account the kind of accelerations that the events can take. 
This was also true of the Sovereign Debt Crisis. At the beginning, we saw that it was a 
problem of Greece, then of Portugal. And when we realized it was also a problem in 
Italy, we are already within the problem. But because we are just using this kind of 
linear model, we were not —at least, I was not able to think that way ; maybe other 
people were at the bank —to see that things sometimes can go very, very, very fast. 
Much faster than expected with your models, with your analysis. If we had had the 
perception of the magnitude of the events, maybe sometimes we would ’ve been 
taking the lead of the events, and not just f ollowing the events. You have to start to 
think that things can go bad, in a much quicker way than your models say. 
The effects of the global recession impacted the Italian economy in ways that are still being 
felt today, undercutting confidence in its ban king system and sparking a punishing 
contraction in the finance sector.  According to Gobbi, the goal should be to try to get ahead 
of events and take the lead, rather than just following and reacting to them. 
Gobbi argued for the same need to avoid linear thinking and static models in addressing the 
threat that climate change poses to the economic order. Current models and assumption s 
may be insufficient to account for the full brunt of climate change on the economy as 
temperatures rise faster than originally projected by experts. He warned,  
This is exactly the same thing. You think that you have this kind of linearity of the 
effects, from the increase in the temperature and the kind of effects. But then you 
discover things are much more quicker than you expected. You may have 40 degrees 
Celsius in London, when it was expected to reach this kind of high temperature in 
2040. Because things can go much, much faster. 
716
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
To successfully address a crisis, you must also take into consideration factors relating 
to the stability of businesses and the real economy. 
If there was a silver lining to Italy’s troubles, Gobbi reflected, it was a kind of “Schumpeterian 
creative destruction”—the businesses surviving the crises were much stronger than those 
that preceded them, and the Italian economy underwent a process of reform that, however 
painful, left it in a stronger condition. Gobbi point ed out that Italy’s debt service relative to 
GDP is now lower than some other European economies, such as France and Spain.  
Because of these developments , when the COVID-19 pandemic  struck and  the country 
became one of the first to go into lockdown in early 2020, the banks were stronger, although 
the real economy suffered slow growth. Italy’s response to COVID was swift and informed by 
previous experiences, said Gobbi, and those lessons learned helped dampen the ill effects of 
the economic shutdown. Policymakers built a bridge to carry economic activity through the 
pandemic shock and avoid weakening the position of the banks, which would have reduced 
their ability to lend in the recovery.  
He noted:  
We had moratoria and then we had some sort of susp ension of debt payments. We 
had subsidized lending to firms, and we had a number of regulatory supervision and 
regulatory measures that just prevented the profit and loss account problems of firms 
and households from becoming a balance sheet problem for the banks, with all these 
kinds of interaction and secondary effects. This was prevented. 
The measures have been regarded as being successful, because now I think that we 
have almost recovered, or recovered from the pre -COVID crisis. The economy has 
grown ve ry fast in the past years, and we ha ve not had the kind of financial -real 
economy vicious cycle that we had in the past. 
Dated: April 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022–18 
717
Lessons Learned: Giorgio Gobbi Cardona