--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 4 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Ewald Nowotny Lessons Learned: Ewald Nowotny 
Maryanne Chute Lynch 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale University 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Finance Commons, Macroeconomics Commons, and the Policy Design, Analysis, and 
Evaluation Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Chute Lynch, Maryanne and Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2025) "Lessons Learned: Ewald Nowotny," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 4, 30-33. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1674 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss4/3 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss4/3

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
 
   
 
Ewald Nowotny 
By Mary Anne Chute Lynch and Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Ewald Nowotny was appointed governor of the National Bank of Austria in September 2008 at 
the start of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), having previously served as a vice president of the 
European Investment Bank in Luxembourg, the house bank of the Euro pean Union. Nowotny 
participated in the implementation of the multilateral stabilization framework known as the 
Vienna Initiative, which helped restore stability in the financial markets of Central, Eastern, 
and Southeastern Europe during the GFC. Working with the Austrian central bank, the 
European Commission, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), he steered the Austrian 
economy away from recession. During the European Sovereign Debt Crisis, Nowotny and other 
central bankers helped safeguard the finan cial and macroeconomic stability of the euro, 
shaping new institutions such as the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) to protect the 
European Union’s financial system. He retired in 2019 because of term limits and returned to 
his position as professor at the Vienna University of Economics. This Lessons Learned is based 
on an interview held in November 2022; the full transcript is available here. 
Crises can impact a country in unexp ected ways, indirectly and through contagion 
channels. In such circumstances, unconventional tools may be required.  
Nowotny explained that at first the Austrian central bank did not think it would be 
significantly impacted by the GFC, because “in Austria,  people did not invest in American 
markets.” But because the country’s banks were very exposed to banks in Central and 
Eastern Europe that had relied heavily on the global wholesale funding markets, which dried 
up as the crisis developed, they ran into problems.  
There was fear that the parents of foreign banks would pull their funding from their banks 
in these regions, Nowotny related.  
We did have a problem in 2009 when a discussion started about the big exposure of 
Austrian banks in Eastern Europe, because this was considered as being a major risk. 
Then, Austrian banks were attacked, and these markets were attacked, and we had to 
create a special program, which was called the Vienna Initiative, to secure liquidity to 
the banks in this region, which was successful. 
The Vienna Initiative was a coordinated response that focused on a pressing need and 
addressed a gap in the infrastructure: funding for EU countries that were not in the eurozone 
and so could not borrow from the ECB as lender of last resort. According to  Nowotny, the 
program provided a de facto guarantee of the liquidity of the banks in Central and Eastern 
Europe. “It was guaranteed by the European Union, the IMF, national governments, and the 
central banks as potential lenders of last resort to the banks involved.” 
30

--- Page 4 ---
The guarantee was never activated, but even so, its impact was significant to banks in Central 
and Eastern Europe, said Nowotny, demonstrating the power of guarantees: 
By giving a guarantee that they will be kept liquid, [the banks] gained access to the 
money market. These guarantees have never been used, but otherwise, they would 
have fallen into great troubles. . . . 
If this guarantee were needed, we would have had to print money, but it was never 
needed. It was never needed because it’s just a matter of trust. This is the money 
market where the banks are lending to each other. If they trust that they will get their 
money back, they are prepared to lend, and so, the guarantee helps to keep this money 
market going. 
Nowotny counted the program as a clear success: 
Otherwise, there could have been the first banking crisis in Central Europe, and we 
would have [had] a crisis of the whole region, and quite a number of banks. It was not 
only the Austrian banks. There were Italian banks, French banks that were heavily 
exposed in this region, so it would have vast affects. 
The first and most powerful action in a crisis is to provide liquidity to ensure 
stability and prevent collapse.  
The most effective action during the GFC, the Sovereign Debt Crisis, and the COVID -19 
crisis, said Nowotny, was providing liquidity; each crisis had its own unique 
characteristics. The GFC “was basically a liquidity crisis,” Nowotny said. “It came from  the 
US and from banks that had invested in the US housing markets, and so it was important 
to Europe.” The European Central Bank (ECB) took immediate action to provide liquidity 
and to ensure US dollar liquidity for German and French banks invested in the  US by 
entering a swap agreement between the ECB and Federal Reserve. The European 
Commission (EC) worked with the national governments and central banks to provide 
liquidity to banks in Central and Eastern Europe that were not eligible to access ECB 
funding. 
Nowotny described the Sovereign Debt Crisis as “the most difficult one” on multiple levels. 
The crisis impacted northern and southern eurozone countries very differently and 
created the overriding issue of a threat to the unity of the eurozone, Nowotny  said. After 
Greece announced that its deficits were much larger than officially stated, “nobody was 
prepared to lend money to them. That would have led to bankruptcy of the Greek banks,” 
said Nowotny, which could have led to Greece being forced to leave t he eurozone, which 
could have started a cascade of problems for other southern countries in Europe, especially 
Italy, Spain, and Portugal, which also had big deficits, he pointed out. 
  
31
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
With help from the IMF, loans from the EC, and refinancing with the ECB, jointly referred 
to as the “Troika,” a rescue package with tight controls was created for Greece, Nowotny 
said. Under intense pressure, 
a clear political decision was made that the integrity of the eurozone, of the 
European market union, should be sav ed. Therefore, Greece should be saved, and 
this was through a number of steps.”  
The first action was starting an IMF program. The second action was to give loans 
from the European Commission. The third action was that the ECB still allowed 
Greek banks access to refinancing with the ECB.  
The ECB accepted government bonds as collateral even if they were not investment grade. 
The support came with tight controls overseen by the Troika. 
Germany argued that the efforts were not in the ECB’s mandate and took it s objection to 
the Constitutional Court of Germany and the European Court of Justice. The problem for 
the ECB was that the central bank could not finance governments. The ECB argued that this 
was not fiscal policy, Nowotny stated, but rather monetary policy to stabilize markets and 
avoid “fragmentation,” underscoring the extremely fragile unity of the eurozone at this 
time. Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg were not directly affected by 
the Sovereign Debt Crisis, Nowotny pointed out, “but we all had an interest in the survival 
of the European Monetary Union, so we agreed with the programs.” 
He added:  
We are interconnected, so for the northern countries, it is important that the 
southern countries stay within the eurozone, and they are big cu stomers for our 
exports. We have enlightened self -interest that they are not getting into 
catastrophic situations.” 
By prioritizing the EU over national interests, the existential crisis was avoided and new 
institutions such as the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) and European Systemic Risk 
Board (ESRB), which were lacking before the Global Financial Crisis, have been created and 
strengthened.  
Nowotny emphasized that one of the big lessons from the first and the second crises was 
adopting macroprudential policies, particularly the Basel III regulations that “forced the 
banks to have more capital,” and the ESRB, which was created in 2010 to provide 
macroprudential oversight of the EU financial system. “This helped put the banks in much 
better shape than th ey had been at the first financial crisis,” he observed. There is “no 
banking problem any longer because they have adequate capital.”  
The nature of the pandemic also greatly impacted the response, according to Nowotny. 
“The third crisis, the Corona crisis, in some way was the easiest one because, from our point 
of view, everybody, every country, was concerned the same way. There was broad 
32
Lessons Learned: Ewald Nowotny Chute Lynch and Wiggins

--- Page 6 ---
agreement that you have to do something.” In 2020, the ECB implemented a new purchase 
program, the Pandemic Emergency P urchase Program, costing EUR 750 billion, to fund 
huge asset purchases by the ECB. The circumstances of the pandemic made the north-south 
divide recede so that doing what was needed was easier. However, “now, after the Corona 
crisis, we have the risk of coming back to this north-south divide,“ he observed. 
 
Monitor and taper liquidity cautiously as the economy rebounds to avoid inflation. 
The infusion of capital in the Sovereign Debt Crisis and COVID crisis was good business for 
the public and for the state, Nowotny said, but it came with a cost: 
[Inflation is] one of the problems that we are seeing now because it meant that 
money was very cheap, not only for governments but also for the private sector, for 
housing loans, and for financial investments. The n orthern countries, Austria, 
Germany, they were rather concerned about the stability aspects of this purchasing 
program, because the ECB (and also the Fed) de facto became market makers of last 
resort. . . . 
After the euro crisis of 2012 there was a period of very low inflation and very low 
interest rates, and this was the right thing to do. But my criticism was that this 
policy was followed too long. I think the ECB, one year or two years earlier, should 
have switched to a stricter monetary policy. That mea ns higher interest rates, 
especially stopping negative interest rates . . . I never was a friend of negative 
interest rates, and my proposition was to try to get rid of the negative interest rate 
as fast as possible. Now, it is plus 2%, but it was a bit la te. I would have acted 
earlier.”   
The ECB’s Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program during the COVID -19 crisis also caused 
problems with financial stability and created a bubble on the housing market, Nowotny said. 
“It was very cheap,” to borrow, because of low interest rates. “Interest rates are higher now, 
but we also have made it more difficult to borrow. We have restricted leverage so you cannot 
finance a loan-to-value ratio of 100%.” 
The forecasts of the ECB before 2021 had been that there will be very low interest rates and 
very low inflation rates for a long period of time, Nowotny said, noting there were external 
factors that nobody could foresee —COVID-19 and the war in Ukraine. “No w there is a 
consensus that it will take quite some time to get back to lower rates of inflation, to reach a 
target rate of inflation of about 2%.” The ECB is neither buying new bonds, nor reducing the 
balance sheet, Nowotny pointed out. Following the example of the Fed, “I think that the ECB 
will further increase interest rates,” and start reducing the balance sheet, the asset purchases 
in 2023. “This is the most critical part,” Nowotny said.  
Dated: December 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022–28 
33
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 4