--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Iceland: Kaupthing Emergency Liquidity Program, 2008 Iceland: Kaupthing Emergency Liquidity Program, 2008 
Sophia Alden 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Léo Brougher 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Alden, Sophia and Brougher, Léo (2025) "Iceland: Kaupthing Emergency Liquidity Program, 2008," Journal 
of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 203-229. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1619 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/9 
This Case Study is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This case study is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/9

--- Page 3 ---
Iceland: Kaupthing Emergency Liquidity  
Program, 20081 
 Sophia Alden2 and Léo Brougher3 
Yale Program on Financial Stability Case Study 
April 15, 2025 
Abstract 
Following the privatization of Iceland’s state -owned banks  between 1998 and 2003 , the 
three largest banks in Iceland —Glitnir, Landsbanki, and Kaupthing —grew rapidly, with 
consolidated assets increasing from 100 % of Iceland’s GDP in 2004 to nearly 900 % by the 
end of 2007. Initially, this growth was funded by debt issuances in the European medium -
term note market; however, as cracks in the international financial system appeared in 2006, 
the banks turned to offering high -interest savings accounts through  their foreign 
subsidiaries. Beginning in October 2006, Kaupthing launched “Kaupthing Edge,” an online 
savings and deposit platform operating in markets outside Iceland. When the United States 
investment bank Lehman Brothers failed in September 2008, Iceland’s three major banks 
began to fail as a result of a run on their foreign currency deposits. On October 6, 2008, in an 
effort to prevent the failure of Kaupthing, the Central Bank of Iceland (CBI) provided it with 
a EUR 500 million loan against all of its shares in its subsidiary FIH Erhversbank A/S. 
Although the duration of the loan was initially set for four days, Kaupthing failed in three, on 
October 9 . Immediately following Kaupthing’s failure, the Icelandic Financial Supervisory 
Authority appointed a resolution committee, which, in tandem with the CBI, began searching 
for a buyer for FIH. Upon the transfer of FIH to a consortium of new owners in January 2011, 
the CBI recovered EUR 255 million—approximately half of the initial loan amount. 
Keywords: ad hoc emergency liquidity, Central Bank of Iceland, G lobal Financial Crisis, 
Kaupthing  
 
1 This case study is part  of a Yale Program on Financial Stability (YPFS) selection of New Bagehot Project 
modules considering ad hoc emergency liquidity provision. A survey of all the cases in this series (Kelly et al. 
2025) and the individual cases underlying it are available fr om the Journal of Financial Crises  at 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/. Wiggins et al. (2022) surveys broad-
based emergency liquidity programs. 
2 Research Associate, YPFS, Yale School of Management. 
3 Research Associate , YPFS, Yale School of Management . The authors wish to thank Mr. Tómas Brynjólfsson, 
Deputy Governor of Financial Stability at the Central Bank of Iceland for his helpful review of this paper.  
203

--- Page 4 ---
Overview 
This case study covers the ad hoc emergency 
liquidity program provided by the Central 
Bank of Iceland (CBI) to Kaupthing  in 
October 2008 during the Global Financial 
Crisis (GFC). Along with Glitnir and 
Landsbanki, Kaupthing was one of Iceland's 
three major banks, and it was grappling with 
severe liquidity issues following massive 
deposit withdrawals and the collapse of 
interbank markets —exacerbated by the 
failure of the United States investment bank 
Lehman Brothers. The CBI intended the 
intervention to act as a bridge loan to aid 
Kaupthing in surviving its liquidity crisis 
(Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020; CBI 
2019). The intervention was part of Iceland’s 
broader effort to maintain financial stability 
during this turbulent period , an effort that 
included the nationalization of Iceland’s 
other large banks, Landsbanki and Glitner ; 
establishing bilateral swap facilities with the 
central banks of Denmark, Norway, and 
Sweden; and a blanket guarantee on 
domestic deposits  (Baudino, Sturluson, and 
Svoronos 2020; Hoffner 2023; Kulam 2022). 
Additionally, Kaupthing ’s subsidiaries in 
Sweden and the U nited Kingdom received 
separate s upport from the regulatory 
authorities in those countries to protect their 
depositors and ensure national financial 
stability (HM Treasury 2008; Sveriges 
Riksbank 2008). 
Iceland’s entry into the European Economic 
Area (EEA) in 1994 allowed Icelandic banks 
to expand into Europe  (see Figure 1 for a 
timeline of the Global Financial Crisis in 
Iceland). This coincided with the 
deregulation and privatization of Iceland’s 
banking sector, which concluded in 2003 
with the merger of Kaupthing and 
Bunadarbanki, which kept the Kaupthing 
name (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 
2020). Following privatization, Ice landic 
Key Terms 
Purpose: The emergency liquidity provided to 
Kaupthing by the CBI was intended to act as a 
bridge loan to aid Kaupthing in surviving its 
liquidity crisis  
Announcement 
Date 
October 7, 2008  
Operational Date October 6, 2008  
Termination Date October 9, 2008  
Legal Authority Act No. 36/2001  
Administrator Central Bank of Iceland  
Peak Authorization EUR 500 million  
Peak Outstanding EUR 500 million  
Collateral All of Kaupthing’s shares in 
its subsidiary FIH 
Erhversbank A/S (FIH) were 
pledged as collateral  
Haircut and 
Recourse 
The book value of FIH was 
more than 200% of the loan 
amount 
Interest Rate and 
Fees 
9.4% (market rate plus 500 
bps) 
Term Four days (terminated a day 
early due to the failure of 
Kaupthing) 
Part of a Package The Icelandic government 
announced a full guarantee 
of domestic deposits on 
October 6 
Outcomes Kaupthing collapsed on the 
night of October 9; 
the emergency liquidity 
assistance did not prevent 
the failure of Kaupthing 
because, in practice, the 
three major Icelandic banks 
were already insolvent; 
following the sale of FIH, the 
CBI recovered approximately 
half of the loan amount  
 
(continued) 
204
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
banks experienced rapid growth, with 
consolidated assets across the three largest 
banks increasing from 100% of GDP in 2004 
to nearly 900 % by the end of 2007 (IMF 
2008). Kaupthing saw its total assets grow 
from 558 billion  Icelandic kronur (ISK) 4 at 
the end of 2003 to ISK 5.3 trillion5 by the end 
of 2007 (Kaupthing 2004; Kaupthing 
2008b).  
To support their rapid expansion, the three 
major Icelandic banks relied heavily on 
international funding, initially by borrowing 
in the euro-denominated medium-term note 
market, taking advantage of Iceland's 
favorable credit rating at the time (Baudino, 
Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). However, by early 2006, cracks in the financial system began 
to emerge, with analysts warning of potential financial instability, as highlighted by Danske 
Bank’s 2006 “Iceland: Geyser Crisis ” report (Valgreen et al. 2006) . This weakened market 
confidence limited Icelandic banks’ access to wholesale funding and prompted Kaupthing to 
attract deposits abroad through subsidiaries and online platforms such as “Kaupthing Edge” 
(Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020 ; BCBS 2010) . As international deposit collection 
slowed by mid-2007, Icelandic banks turned to central banks for funding, primarily through 
collateralized borrowing from the CBI and the European Central Bank (ECB), with Kaupthing 
accessing ECB funding  through its subsidiary in Luxembourg (Baudino, Sturluson, and 
Svoronos 2020). 
Iceland’s three major banks  passed stress test s in 2008, with the Icelandic Financial 
Supervisory Authority ( Fjármálaeftirlitið, or FME) releasing the results of its spring stress 
tests in August 2008 (CBI 2008f; FME 2008a). However, rising funding pressures caused by 
falling stock and real estate prices signaled worsening market expectations , challenging the 
banks’ ability to sufficiently collateralize their borrowing from central banks  (Baudino, 
Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). 
Kaupthing and the other two major banks turned to issuing bonds  to one other and using 
these bonds as collateral to secure loans from central banks. This novel practi ce allowed 
them to bypass central bank funding limits, as they could issue these bonds—often referred 
to as “love letters”—whenever necessary, in virtually unlimited amounts . By August 2008, 
the ECB had concerns about the quality of the collateral being provided by Icelandic banks’ 
Luxembourg subsidiaries  and refused to accept any additional  Icelandic bank  bonds as 
collateral, restricting Kaupthing’s access to central bank borrowing from the ECB. However, 
 
4 Per FRED, USD 1 = ISK 70.96 on December 31, 2003. 
5 Per FRED, USD 1 = ISK 61.84 on December 31, 2007. 
Notable Features Before extending the loan, 
the CBI governor privately 
told the prime minister he 
didn’t expect Kaupthing to 
repay it; 
The collateral for the 
emergency liquidity 
assistance  provided to 
Kaupthing consisted of all its 
shares in its foreign Danish 
subsidiary, FIH Erhversbank 
A/S, valued at more than 
200% of the loan amount 
based on its book value, 
though this valuation was 
not independently verified 
owing to time constraints 
205
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 6 ---
the CBI continued to accept these “love letter ” bonds out of concerns of systemic stress 
(Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). 
Although the Icelandic banks had no direct exposure to Lehman Brothers , its  collapse on 
September 15, 2008 , indirectly affected Icelandic banks by freezing interbank credit 
markets, further aggravating Kaupthing’s liquidity issues (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 
2020). 
As market conditions continued to deteriorate , on September 25, Glitnir informed 
authorities it could not meet its liabilities due the following month and sought an emergency 
loan from the CBI. The CBI declined the request, noting Glitnir would face similar payment 
obligations in January 2009; on September 29, the FME partially took over Glitnir. This move 
led to a downgrade of Iceland’s sovereign credit rating, which in turn resulted in credit lines 
for Icelandic banks being cut or subjected to margin calls (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 
2020).  
Following the downgrade, Kaupthing and other Icelandic banks faced large -scale deposit 
runs (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). Between late September and early October, 
Kaupthing Edge saw 30% of its deposits withdrawn (FME 2009) . Runs were particularly 
severe at Kaupthing’s UK subsidiary, Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander (KSF). 
In a meeting in the early morning hour s of October 6, 2008, among the CBI and three 
representatives from JPMorgan, the JPMorgan representatives suggested that the broader  
Icelandic financial system could not be saved, but there was still hope to defend Kaupthing 
(Parliamentary Research Committ ee 2010). On the following morning, the governor of the 
CBI stated in a phone call with the prime minister that  Kaupthing would go bankrupt if the 
CBI did not provide the loan on the same day  (CBI 2019) . The prime minister and the 
governor of the CBI  discussed granting EUR 500 million 6 of liquidity —using FIH 
Erhversbank A/S, Kaupthing’s Danish subsidiary and at the time the sixth -largest bank in 
Denmark, as collateral—to function as a bridge loan to help Kaupthing survive its liquidity 
crisis (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020; CBI 2019) . On the call, then–CBI Governor 
Davíð Oddsson told the prime minister that he didn’t expect CBI would get its money back; 
later that day, he told reporters that if Kaupthing didn ’t repay the loan, the CBI would have 
acquired a very good Danish bank (CBI 2019; RÚV 2008). 
The timeline to finalize the loan was rushed , and there was limited time to assess the 
collateral and valu e of FIH, so the CBI reached out to two governors of the Danmarks 
Nationalbank to ask if they considered FIH solid collateral for a short -term loan of EUR 500 
million. T he governors agreed that it was (CBI 2019; Parliamentary Budget Committee 
2013). The CBI did not have the time to independently verify the valuation of FIH (CBI 2019). 
Owing to time constraints, there was not enough time to transfer ownership of FIH to the 
CBI in either electronic or paper form. Instead, a collateral pledge was signed in two  parts: 
 
6 According to FRED, EUR 1 = 1.35 USD on October 6, 2008. 
206
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
one by Kaupthing ’s CEO and the other  by Kaupthing’s treasury managing director and its 
general counsel (CBI 2019). 
Later in the afternoon of October 6, the CBI transferred the funds into Kaupthing ’s account 
at Deutsche Bank . In the payment instruct ions, the CBI  specified that the euros should be 
made available to Kaupthing on the same day (CBI 2019). The funds came from the foreign 
exchange reserves of the CBI (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). 
Despite the liquidity support from the central bank , runs intensified, particularly in KSF . 
Following a period of intensified oversight, the UK Financial Services Authority (FSA) 
concluded on October 8, 2008, that KSF no longer met the requirements to operate as a credit 
institution. The FSA triggered the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS), the UK’s 
statutory compensation fund of last resort for customers of financial services firms  and 
ordered it to halt new business. That same day, the UK government used special powers to 
transfer KSF’s Edge deposits to ING Direct, financed by the FSCS and the government, which 
became KSF’s creditors (HM Treasury 2008). Kaupthing collapsed on October 9, prompting 
the FME to take control. In the aftermath, the Icelandic government attributed  the bank’s 
failure to the collapse of KSF  (CBI 2019; FME 2008b; Parliamentary Research Committee 
2010).  
Immediately following Kaupthing ’s failure, the FME appointed a resolution committee, 
which began searching with the CBI for a buyer for FIH , with seve ral unsuccessful sales 
attempts made in the last few months of 2008 (CBI 2019). The CBI eventually sold FIH to a 
consortium consisting of ATP  (Denmark’s largest pension fund) , PFA (Denmark’s second-
largest pension fund), Folksam (one of Sweden’s largest insurance groups), and CP Dyvig & 
Co. (a consulting and investment firm)  in January 2011, recovering EUR 255 million —
approximately half of the initial loan amount (CBI 2010a; CBI 2019). 
Following the collapse of all three major Icelandic banks, the Icelandic Parliament 
established the Special Investigation Commission (SIC) , whose primary mandate was to 
investigate and analyze the events leading up the banking collapse. The SIC published its 
report in April 2010  (SIC 2010). In addition to the SIC report, parliamentary hearings 
provided further post-crisis assessments (Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013).  
Figure 1: Timeline of the GFC in Iceland and Emergency Liquidity Assistance Provided 
to Kaupthing 
Date Event  
1994 Iceland joins the EEA and gains access to European markets through European Union passport 
rules. 
2003 The merger of Kaupthing and Bunadarbanki is complete, finalizing the privatization of Iceland ’s 
three major banks.  
March 2006 Danske Bank issues its “Iceland: Geyser Crisis” report, warning of a substantial risk of a financial 
crisis. 
Oct. 2006 Kaupthing Edge is launched in the UK, Belgium, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. 
207
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 8 ---
May 2008 All Icelandic banks pass the stress test of the FME. 
Aug. 2008 ECB refuses to accept Icelandic bank bonds as collateral, but the CBI continues to accept the 
bonds to avoid potential systemic stress.  
Sept. 29, 2008 Left with no alternatives and rumors about the bank ’s problems, Glitnir’s board and main 
shareholders accept the government’s proposal for a partial takeover. 
Sept. 30 2008 Standard & Poor’s cuts Iceland’s sovereign credit rating by three notches, leading to credit lines 
for Icelandic banks being cut or subjected to margin calls. 
Oct. 3, 2008 By Friday, October 3, the Icelandic banking system is subject to an increasing and widespread 
run, bringing the whole system to the brink of collapse. 
Oct. 5, 2008 Kaupthing and Landsbanki submit a joint proposal to the government that suggests the CBI 
should immediately provide EUR 1,000 million to Landsbanki and EUR 500 million to Kaupthing . 
Oct. 6, 2008 Prime minister announces the government’s intent to fully guarantee domestic deposits. 
Oct. 6, 2008 A EUR 500 million loan from CBI to Kaupthing is approved and disbursed with all of Kaupthing’s 
shares in its subsidiary FIH put up as collateral. Landsbanki does not receive a loan. The Finnish 
Financial Supervisory Authority blocks the transfer of assets owned by Icelandic banks, 
including Kaupthing, from leaving the country.  
Oct. 7, 2008 Faced with the imminent collapse of all three major banks, the Parliament passes the 
Emergency Act (Act No. 125/2008) early on Tuesday morning. The Icelandic FME takes over 
Landsbanki. 
Oct. 8, 2008 Riksbank, the Swedish central bank, extends 5,000 million Swedish kronor (SEK)(a) to Kaupthing 
Sverige. UK’s FSA transfers KSF UK deposits to ING Direct as it determines that KSF no longer 
meets its threshold conditions for meeting depositor withdrawal needs. The FME puts Glitnir 
into receivership. 
Oct. 9, 2008 The FME intervenes into Kaupthing’s operations using the authority granted under the 
Emergency Act (Act No. 125/2008). The FME appoints a resolution committee that assumes all 
authorizations of the board of directors of Kaupthing. The CBI and the resolution committee 
immediately begin searching for a buyer for FIH.  
Sept. 18, 2010 The purchase agreement for the sale of FIH is signed. 
Jan. 6, 2011 FIH is handed over to new owners; following the handover, a payment of 1,900 million Danish 
kroner (DKK; EUR 255 million) is transferred to the CBI such that approximately half of the 
original loan amount is recovered. 
(a) According to the ECB, EUR 1 = SEK 9.68 on October 8, 2008. 
Source: Authors’ analysis.  
Summary Evaluation 
The CBI loan to Kaupthing was controversial in Iceland because of the si ze of the loss 
incurred by the CBI and because of the lack of public disclosures about the CBI’s reasoning 
behind the decision to grant the emergency liquidity assistance . Iceland’s Parliamentary 
Budget Committee began seeking information from the CBI regarding the loan in 2012 (RÚV 
2013). During the 2012 –2013 legislative session, the Parliamentary Budget Committee 
published a document containing the majority opinion of the committee regarding the CBI’s 
loan. This report finds that the CBI broke its own rules in extending the loan to Kaupthing 
without following its own procedures. The committee also concludes, in light of recently 
208
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
revealed information about the collapse of the Icelandic banking system, that  the need for 
the last-resort loan to Kaupthing was not as unforeseen as was originally thought. Therefore, 
the committee state s that the CBI  could have had time to prepare for the loan with proper 
documentation (Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013).  
On May 27, 2019, the CBI released a comprehensive report on the emergency loan  with a 
foreword written by then –Governor of the CBI Már Guðmundsson  (Elliott 2019) . 
Guðmundsson, who retired after 10 years in office shortly after the publication of the report, 
writes that there was a strong possibility the loan was granted because the CBI believed that 
the loan could ensure that one bank (Kaupthing) would remain in operation and because the 
collateral made the risk of loss small. However , Guðmundsson writes with the benefit of 
hindsight that neither belief was correct and that in retrospect it would have been better not 
to grant the loan (CBI 2019). Guðmundsson also writes that while in retrospect the decision 
to grant the loan was wrong no laws  were broken in the process of lending Kaupthing the 
EUR 500 million (Elliott 2019). 
In the foreword to the CBI ’s report, Guðmundsson also identifies the two primary lessons 
that the CBI learned while analyzing the circumstances surrounding the emergency loan. 
First, the process surrounding the granting of last-resort loans needed to be clarified. Second, 
Guðmundsson writes that the pledging of capital of a foreign bank as collateral is not 
appropriate when the CBI grants loans to domestic banks (CBI 2019).  
The day after the report was released, Guðmundsson said at a press conference,  
I think that we must learn the lesson for the future that great leng ths should be gone to 
in order to avoid taking shares in foreign banks as collateral —and not only when a 
banking crisis is in progress. That is both because shares in banks can evaporate and get 
lost first, but also because then you are under overseas juri sdiction. Foreign 
governments and oversight agencies can affect the process, sometimes for the better and 
sometimes in a way that would not necessarily aid our interests. (Elliott 2019) 
Guðmundsson also highlighted at this press conference the importance for central banks of 
maintaining a sufficient view of available collateral at any given time for facilities of last 
resort (Bjarnason 2019).  
In 2019, there was a bill before Parliament that would require any decisions on the granting 
of last-resort loans to be taken during meetings with the governor of the central bank and 
three deputy governors and  further requiring that the decision be recorded in the meeting 
minutes for proper documentation (CBI 2019) . At the press conference in May 2019,  
Guðmundsson said that the board of directors was still making board decisions that were 
not accompanied by minutes explaining the decision -making process, and Guðmundsson 
expressed that this absence of a requirement of meeting minutes should be altered moving 
forward (Bjarnason 2019). In July 2019, Parliament approved the Act on the Central Bank of 
Iceland, No. 92/2019, which includes the stipulation that when the central bank is deciding 
whether to grant guarantees or loans to institutions experiencing liquidity problem s, the 
209
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 10 ---
decision must be made by the governor and the deputy governors and recorded in the 
meeting minutes (Icelandic Government 2019). 
The Bank for International Settlements’ Financial Stability Institute also discusses the use of 
emergency liquidity assis tance by Iceland during the GFC. Patrizia Baudino, Jon Thor 
Sturluson, and Jean-Philippe Svoronos write that the emergency liquidity assistance proved 
inadequate for preventing the failure of Kaupthing because , in practice, the three major 
Icelandic banks were already insolvent. Had sufficient information on the solvency position 
of Kaupthing been available in the first week of October, it would have shown that granting 
emergency liquidity assistance  under the c ircumstances would not have prevented the 
failure of the bank, as this liquidity would not have addressed their lack of solvency (Baudino, 
Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020).  
210
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
Sources: Bloomberg; World Bank Deposit Insurance Dataset; World Bank Global Financial Development Database.  
 
 
 
  
211
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 12 ---
Key Design Decisions 
1. Purpose: The emergency liquid ity the CBI provided to Kaupthing aimed to 
stabilize the bank as it faced substantial deposit withdrawals and a loss of access 
to funding sources following the downgrade of Iceland ’s sovereign credit rating 
and the freezing of interbank credit markets. 
In 2008, increasing funding pressures because of falling stock and real estate prices signaled 
worsening market expectations and contributed to a decline in the quality and amount of 
collateral Kaupthing—one of Iceland ’s three largest banks, which, along with Glitnir and 
Landsbanki accounted for 80% of the financial system —could post at the CBI . This 
challenged the banks’ ability to sufficiently collateralize their borrowing from central banks. 
Kaupthing and the other banks turned to issuing bonds to each other and using these bonds 
as collateral to secure loans from central banks. This novel practice allowed them to bypass 
central bank funding limits, as they could issue these bonds —often referred to as “love 
letters”—whenever needed  in virtually unlimited amounts . By August 2008, the ECB had 
concerns about the quality of the collateral being provided by Icelandic banks’ Luxembourg 
subsidiaries and refused to accept any additional  Icelandic bank  bonds as collateral, 
restricting Kaupthing’s access to central bank borrowing from the ECB ; however, the CBI 
continued to accept these “love letter” bonds out of concerns of systemic stress (Baudino, 
Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020).  
Although the Icelandic banks had no direct exposure to Lehman Brothers, its collapse on 
September 15, 2008 , indirectly affected Iceland ic banks by freezing interbank credit 
markets, further aggravating Kaupthing’s liquidity issues (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 
2020). 
The Icelandic Financial Supervisory Authority  partially took over Glitnir on September 29 , 
and this led to a downgrade of Iceland ’s sovereign credit rating, which in turn resulted in 
credit lines for Icelandic banks being cut or subjected to margin calls (Baudino, Sturluson, 
and Svoronos 2020).  
Following the downgrade, Kaupthing and other Icelandic ban ks faced large -scale deposit 
runs (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020) . Between late September and early October, 
Kaupthing Edge saw 30% of its deposits withdrawn (FME 2009). 
In a meeting in the early morning hours of October 6 among the CBI and three 
representatives from JPMorgan, the JPMorgan representatives suggested that the broader 
financial system could not be saved, but there was still hope to defend Kaupthing 
(Parliamentary Research Committee 2010). On the morning of October 6, 2008, the governor 
of the CBI stated in a phone call with the prime minister that Kaupthing would go bankrupt 
if it did not provide the loan on the same day (CBI 2019).   
Later that afternoon, on October 6, the CBI transferred EUR 500 million  into Kaupthing’s 
account at Deu tsche Bank , using Kaupthing’s 99.89% stake in  FIH Erhversbank A/S  as 
212
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
collateral. The assistance was intended to act as a bridge loan to help Kaupthing survive its 
liquidity crisis (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020; CBI 2019). 
It was not until months following the collapse of Kaupthing, Glitnir, and Landsbanki that 
sufficiently accurate information on the banks ’ solvency positions became available 
(Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). Mark Flannery writes, in “Iceland’s Failed Banks: 
A Post-Mortem” (a report prepared for the SIC), that while it is not possible to definitively 
state whether one or all of the major banks were insolvent in the first week of October, “it is 
quite possible” that the banks were insolvent  (Flannery 2009, 106). Later valuations of the 
domestic portion of the major banks ’ asset portfolios find large losses attributable to poor 
underwriting and overreliance on equity shares as collateral (Flannery 2009) . Baudino, 
Sturluson, and Svoronos write that even a  conservative estimate of the banks’ assets would 
have overstated their capital due to connected lending and because customers had pledged 
the banks’ own shares as capital. They write that if Kaupthing’s solvency had been clearer in 
early October, it would  have shown that granting emergency liquidity assistance wouldn’t 
have prevented its collapse, as the issue was solvency not liquidity (Baudino, Sturluson, and 
Svoronos 2020).  
2. Part of a Package: The government of Iceland guaranteed all domestic deposits the 
same day the CBI provided  emergency liquidity assistance to Kaupthing . 
Kaupthing’s foreign subsidiaries received support from their respective official 
sectors.  
On October 6, the same day the CBI granted the emergency liquidity assistance to Kaupthing, 
the prime minister announced in a public address the government’s intent to fully guarantee 
domestic deposits, stating that “deposits by Icelanders and private pensions savings in all 
Icelandic banks are secure and the exchequer will ensure that such deposits are reimbursed 
to savers in full” (Haarde 2008, 3). This guarantee did not extend to foreign depositors. For 
a full case study on the deposit guarantee, see Kulam (2022). 
Also on October 6, the FM E announced a temporary halt on trading of all financial 
instruments issued by Kaupthing, Glitnir, Landsbanki, Straumur-Burdarás Investment Bank, 
SPRON hf., and Exista hf. on regulated exchanges (CBI 2008b). 
In the first quarter of 2008, the CBI sought to strengthen its reserves by establishing bilateral 
swap facilities with the Danmarks Nationalbank, Norges Bank, and Sveriges Riksbank. These 
agreements allowed the CBI to borrow up to EUR 500 million from each central bank, and 
while initially the agreements were precautionary, the CBI could use the funds to maintain 
financial stability. On October 14, only eight days after the CBI provided emergency liquidity 
assistance to Kaupthing, it drew EUR 200 million from both Danmarks Nationalbank and 
Norges Bank (Hoffner 2023).7 These actions were a temporary solution until Iceland secured 
a support package from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on November 19, 2008 
 
7 Sveriges Riksbank did not initially allow the CBI to draw under the agreement, owing to the CBI and Icelandic 
government’s failure to honor the commitments outlined in the swap memo (Hoffner 2023).  
213
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 14 ---
(Ingves 2022). For a full case study on Scandinavian central bank swaps with  Iceland, see 
Hoffner (2023).  
On October 7, 2008 , the Icelandic Parliament passed emergency legislation, Act No. 
125/2008, that provided the legal basis for the resolution process for banks in Iceland 
(Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). The emergency legislation granted the Ministry of 
Finance the ability to provide funds and capital to establish new banks or restructure 
existing banks ; authorized the supervisory authority to take control of failing banks ; and 
changed the hierarchy of claims, prioritizing custome r deposits over unsecured claims in a 
financial institution ’s bankruptcy proceeding (Icelandic Government 2008) . This act 
provided the legal basis for the takeover of Landsbanki on October 7, Glitnir on October 8, 
and ultimately Kaupthing on October 9 (BCBS 2010). 
In Finland, the Finnish Financial Supervisory Authority blocked the transfer of assets owned 
by Icelandic banks, including Kaupthing, from leaving the country  on October 6  (Brostrom 
2008). 
On October 8, the Swedish Riksbank provided a 5 billion Swedish kronor loan to Kaupthing 
Sverige, the Swedish subsidiary of Kaupthing Bank. The Riksbank believed Kaupthing 
Sverige to be solvent and provided the loan to protect depositors and creditors of both 
Kaupthing Bank Sverige AB and Kaupthing’s Swedish branch (Kaupthing Edge)—as well as 
to safeguard financial stability in Sweden (Sveriges Riksbank 2008). 
The bank ’s UK subsidiary, Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander, also faced a deposit run —
particularly from its Edge online accounts (BCBS 2010). Following a period of intensified 
oversight, the UK Financial Services Authority concluded on October 8, 2008, that KSF no 
longer met the requirements to operate as a credit institution . The FSA triggered the 
Financial Services Compensation Scheme, the UK ’s statutory compensation fund of last 
resort for customers of financial services firms and ordered it to halt new business. That 
same day, the UK government used special powers to transfer KSF ’s Edge deposits to ING 
Direct—financed by the FSCS and t he government, which became KSF ’s creditors (HM 
Treasury 2008). 
3. Legal Authority: Act No. 36/2001 of the central bank laws of Iceland empowers the 
CBI to provide loans to commercial banks and savings banks to ensure financial 
stability. 
The legal basis for the CBI’s emergency liquid ity intervention was established in the 
provisions of Act No. 36/2001, the guiding laws for the CBI. Article 7 broadly establishes the 
CBI’s authority  to provide liquidity assistance to commercial banks and savings banks ; it 
adds however, that the CBI may deviate from standard rates and collateral requirements  to 
preserve the stability of the country ’s financial system. The CBI is authorized to conduct 
credit transactions in both domestic and foreign currencies (Icelandic Government 2001, 9). 
In the 2019 report on the emergency loan granted to Kaupthing, the CBI further defends the 
legality of the loan, stating that during the extreme market turmoil, rapid intervention was 
214
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
required, allowing the CBI to circumvent specific processes required to provide a loan to 
Kaupthing (CBI 2019).  
In 2019, the Icelandic Parliament updated its Central Banking laws in the new Act on the 
Central Bank of Iceland, No. 92/2019, which merged the FME into the CBI, hoping to enhance 
the stability and integrity of Iceland’s banking and financial systems (Icelandic Government 
2019; O’Dwyer 2022) . This act also mandate s that any decision to provide guarantees or 
loans to institutions facing liquidity issues must occur in a meeting convened by the governor 
and include the deputy governors (Icelandic Government 2019). 
4. Administration: After consulting with the prime minister , the CBI governor 
quickly executed the emergency liquidity program, with just two bank managers 
handling the loan on October 6. Relying on Danmarks Nationalbank’s assessment 
of FIH as solid collateral, the CBI transferred the funds to Kaupthing’s account the 
same day. 
There are no documents that can be interpreted as a loan request from Kaupthing with the 
loan amount, period, or terms  (CBI 2019) . The central bank ’s board decided to grant the 
emergency assistance after the governor of the central bank consu lted with the prime 
minister in a phone call (Iceland Monitor 2017), and only two bank managers worked on the 
preparation of the loan. No agreement was formally signed because of the time and speed at 
which the case was processed (CBI 2019).  
The timeline to finalize the loan was rushed. The CBI decided to grant the liquidity assistance 
around noon on October 6,  and the loan needed to go out the same day —leading to limited 
time to assess the collateral and value of FIH (Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013). The 
CBI reached out to two governors of Danmarks Nationalbank to ask if they considered FIH 
solid collateral for a short -term loan of EUR 500 million; the governors agreed that it was. 
The CBI did not have the time to independently verify the valuation of FIH (CBI 2019).  
Due to time constraints, there was not enough time to transfer ownership of FIH to the CBI 
in either electronic or paper form. Instead, a pledge was signed in two parts: one by 
Kaupthing’s CEO and the other by Kaupthing’s treasury managing director and its general 
counsel (CBI 2019).  
Although the loan agreement was never finalized, t he CBI transferred the funds into 
Kaupthing’s account at Deutsche Bank as soon as the  collateral pledge was received —by 
mid-afternoon on October 6. The CBI’s payment instructions specified that the euros should 
be made available to Kaupthing on the same day (CBI 2019). 
Following the collapse of the banks, the CBI created a holding company to unwind assets that 
had been taken over by the CBI and Treasury during the crisis. This holding company became 
responsible for the sale of FIH (Benediktsdóttir, Eggertsson, and Þórarinsson 2017). 
215
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 16 ---
5. Governance: The emergency liquidity assistance  the CBI granted to Kaupthing 
faced limited formal oversight at the time owing to the rapid and ad hoc nature of 
the intervention. 
The emergency liquidity provided by the CBI to Kaupthing had minimal oversight owing to 
the urgent timeline, as Kaupthing needed the loan  on October 6  to avoid bankruptcy (CBI 
2019). By law, the governor of the central bank was permitted to take such drastic actions 
on his or her own (Icelandic Government 2001). In this case, the decision was made swiftly 
through informal discussions between the central bank’s board and the prime minister (CBI 
2019). In 2019, a bill was introduced requiring that decisions on granting last -resort loans 
be made during meetings attended by the central bank ’s governor and three deputy 
governors, with the decision formally documented in the meeting minutes. 
Following the collapse of all three major Icelandic banks, the Icelandic Parliament 
established the Special Investigation Commission , whose mandate was to investigate and 
analyze the events leading up the banking collapse. The SIC report was published in April 
2010 (SIC 2010). In addition to the SIC report, parliamentary hearings provided further post-
crisis assessments (Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013). 
6. Communication and Disclosure: The CBI did not  publish an official press release 
on the assistance to Kaupthing. It delayed until 2017 the release of the transcript 
of the October 6, 2008, phone call in which the CBI governor secured the prime 
minister’s approval for the loan.  
Two days before the CB I provided liquidity assistance, then–Kaupthing chairman Sigurdur 
Einarsson dismissed rumors of instability, noting Kaupthing’s sound fundamentals, liquidity 
position, and strong international portfolio. The Icelandic government also attempted to 
calm fears by denying to the media that it would have to rescue Kaupthing after the partial 
takeover of Glitnir—while stating that it was working on a broad -based rescue plan for the 
Icelandic economy (Goodman 2008).  
On October 7, after the Parliament passed the emergency legislation overnight, Act No. 
125/2008 (see Key Design Decision No. 2, Part of a Package), Kaupthing released a statement 
that it had not been approached by the FME and that the CBI had “provided Kaupthing with 
a 500 million euro loan to facilitate operations ” (Kaupthing 2008a). This report was picked 
up the same day by various news outlets, which reiterated that Kaupthing was committed to 
working with the government to ensure regular workings of the Icelandic financial syste m 
(Esmerk 2008; Pollard 2008). 
No official press briefing was issued by the CBI regarding the loan provided to Kaupthing on 
October 6, 2008. However, on a television program on the evening of October 7, the chair of 
the CBI was asked about the loan, where he described it as a bridg e loan for a very short 
period of time, just to give this bank a chance to develop and not let it fall short because it 
has been subjected to perhaps harsh measures (CBI 2019). When asked about concerns over 
the loan not being repaid, he responded with a reference to the loan’s collateral, saying that 
216
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
the central bank would acquire a very good bank in Denmark if Kaupthing couldn’t repay the 
loan in cash (RÚV 2008). 
On October 8, in its press release announcing its provision of liqu idity to Kaupthing , 
Sweden’s central bank, Sveriges Riksbank, mentioned the support provided by the CBI  
(Sveriges Riksbank 2008).  
The first official Icelandic press release on Kaupthing came on October 9, 2008, from the FME 
when it took control of Kaupthing, but there was no mention of the emergency liquidity (FME 
2008b). In an October 27 press release, the CBI referenced the assistance it had provided to 
Kaupthing, explaining that it was intended to help the ba nk meet the demands of the UK ’s 
Financial Supervisory Authority “regarding the status of [Kaupthing’s] subsidiary in London” 
(CBI 2008e, 1).  
Disclosure on key details of the emergency liquidity program were lacking in the years 
following the crisis. A 2013 Parliamentary Budget Committee report note s that the 
committee had learned of the existence of a transcript of the October 6, 2008, phone call 
between the prime minister and governor of the CBI discussing the loan to Kaupthing  but 
that the CBI had repeatedly denied the committee ’s request to review the transcript, citing 
confidentiality laws (Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013) . The c all contained CBI 
Governor Oddsson’s comment that he didn’t believe the CBI would get its money back from 
the loan, despite its analysis earlier in the year that the bank was solvent  (CBI 2019). The 
Icelandic government released the  transcript of the phone  call in November 2017, despite 
the protests of the former prime minister who said that he was not aware the phone call had 
been recorded (Pálsson 2019).  
Following the sale of FIH, the CBI was under pressure to disclose the decision-making details 
behind both the loan provided to Kaupthing as well as why it had taken FIH as collateral. 
After delays, which the CBI blamed on the heavy workload at the bank, the CBI released the 
report discussing the liquidity assistance to Kaupthing in 2019 (CBI 2019).  
7. Source and Size of Funding: The CBI provided the funds for the EUR 500 million 
loan to Kaupthing from its foreign exchange reserves. 
The CBI agreed to grant Kaupthing a loan of EUR 500 million (approximately ISK 77.5 billion) 
on October 6, 2008 (Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013). The funds came directly from 
the reserves of the CBI  and represented approximately one -fifth of the country ’s entire 
foreign exchange reserves (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). The loan was disbursed 
the same day ; CBI withdrew from its accounts in foreign banks to deposit the funds  into 
Kaupthing’s account in Deutsche Bank Frankfurt  (CBI 2019) . The payment instructions 
noted that the euros should be made available to Kaupthing the same day (CBI 2019; 
Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013). 
On November 18, 2018, the prime minister of Iceland submitted a written request to the CBI 
prompting the central bank to acquire information on how Kaupthing used the funds. The 
CBI then requested the information from Kaupthing and received an examination completed 
in 2010 that tracked the inflows and outflows of Kaupthing’s euro account at Deutsche Bank 
217
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 18 ---
Frankfurt from the morning of October 6 until the bank was taken over by the FME on the 
evening of October 9. The account showed about EUR 800 million of outflows from October 
6 through 8, of which the largest portion, EUR 225 million, went to satisfy Kaupthing Edge 
deposit withdrawals, as displayed in Figure 2 (CBI 2019).  
Figure 2: Inflows and Outflows of Kaupthing ’s Deutsche Bank Fr ankfurt Account, 
October 6–8, 2008 
 
Source: CBI 2019. 
Kaupthing’s euro account at Deutsche Bank in Frankfurt  showed a balance of EUR 600,000 
by end of day on October 8 (CBI 2019).8 
8. Rates and Fees : The CBI charged the euro area interbank interest rate plus 500 
basis points, resulting in an interest rate of 9.4% on the loan. 
The interest rate charged on the loan was 9.4%  (Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013) . 
This rate was equivalent to the interbank interest rate in the euro  area at the time plus 5%  
(CBI 2019).  
Although the reasoning behind this particular rate choice was not disclosed, the CBI was 
authorized to deviate from standard rates (Icelandic Government 2001, 9) . The CBI ’s key 
 
8 The EUR 0.9 million discrepancy between the inflow -outflow difference (EUR 1.5 million) and the reported 
balance at the end of the day on October 8 (EUR 0.6 million) is attributed to rounding error.  
218
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
interest rate at the time was the collateralized lending rate, and the rate on seven-day 
collateralized lending was 15.5% on October 6, 2008 (CBI n.d.). At the time, because of the 
risks facing the Icelandic banking system, Icelandic debt traded at a substantial premium to 
Eurozone interest rates (CBI 2008a). 
9. Loan Duration: The initial loan term was four days, but  it was terminated a day 
early when Kaupthing was taken over by the FME. 
The loan duration for Ka upthing’s emergency liquidity assistance  was four days (Baudino, 
Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020).  
According to the CBI, a duration period of four days was Kaupthing ’s request. However, the 
CBI noted that it did not find any official documents that can be interpreted as a loan request 
from Kaupthing; such a document would have formally listed Kaupthing’s requested loan 
terms and information on how the money would be used (CBI 2019). 
On October 7, 2008, then –Chair of the Board of Governors of the CBI Davíð Oddsson 
participated in a televised interview during which he described the loan to Kaupthing as a 
bridge loan for a very short period of time (Davíðsdóttir 2009).  
On October 9, one day before the scheduled end of the loan period, the FME announced that 
it had become involved in the operations of Kaupthing  and established a resolution 
committee (CBI 2009). The FME and CBI agreed to begin looking for a buyer for FIH with the 
understanding that the funds from the sale would go directly to the CBI. When the new 
owners took over FIH on January 6, 2011, the CBI received a payment of approximately EUR 
255 million (CBI 2019). 
10. Balance Sheet Protection: Kaupthing offered all its shares in its Danish subsidiary, 
FIH Erhversbank A/S, as collateral for the loan , on verbal assurances of its value 
from Danish central bankers.  Ultimately selling the collateral, the CBI received 
approximately half the loan amount. 
On October 5, 2008, Kaupthing and Landsbanki submitted a joint proposal to the Icelandic 
government on how to respond to the crisis . This proposal included providing Landsbanki 
with EUR 1 billion and Kaupthing with EUR 500 million. It is within this context that 
Kaupthing discussed putting FIH, a bank it owned in Denmark, up as collateral for the loan 
(Parliamentary Research Committee 2010). 
Although this proposal was declined by the CBI and dismissed as too risky because the banks 
were likely to fail in a matter of days, the use of FIH as collateral was implemented for the 
loan that was eventually granted to Kaupthing the next day.  In a meeting  at about 2am  on 
October 6  among the CBI and three representatives from JPMorgan, the JPMorgan 
representatives suggested that the broader financial system could not be saved, but there 
was still hope to defend Kaupthing (Parliamentary Research Committee 2010) . Later that 
morning, the governor of the CBI stated in a phone call with the prime minister that 
Kaupthing would go bankrupt if it did not provide the loan on the same day (CBI 2019). 
219
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 20 ---
As collateral for the EUR 500 million emergency liquidity assistance from the CBI, Kaupthing 
put up all of the bank’s shares in FIH (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). FIH was the 
sixth-largest bank in Denmark ; as of June 30, 2008, its equity amounted to 8 billion Danish 
kroner, which corresponded to about EUR 1.07 billion (CBI 2019). The book value of the 
company was thus more than 200% of the loan amount  (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 
2020). 
In a phone call between then–CBI Chair Davíð Oddsson and Prime Minister Geir H. Haarde 
on October 6, 2008, Oddsson stated that he expected the CBI would not get the money back 
by the end of the loan period  and to expect otherwise was wishful thinking  (CBI 2019) . 
According to a report from Sturla Pálsson, director of market business and treasury 
management of the CBI, who was present for the call, the loan was granted even 
though Oddsson thought there was little to no chance of the money being recovered (Seljan 
2016). In the call , Oddsson emphasized the importance of having high -quality collateral 
given the high risk associated with a  loan to Kaupthing (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 
2020). However, since the decision  to finalize a loan between the CBI and Kaupthing was 
made at approximately noon on October 6  and the funds were set to be disbursed the same 
day, there was not much time to verify the status of the collateral before the end of the 
business day in Denmark (Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013). 
The CBI contacted two governors of the Danish central bank on October 6 and asked whether 
FIH represented solid collateral for a short -term loan of EUR 500 million. The Danish 
authorities responded that they believed it was true that FIH constituted solid collateral. The 
CBI did not independently assess the value of FIH, stating that there was not enough time to 
do so (CBI 2019). The CBI’s annual report from 2008 states that all of the collateral attached 
to the loans it had issued to commercial banks were, “regarded of good quality, ” including, 
“all the outstanding shares of the Danish bank FIH” (CBI 2009, 59).  
Shares in FIH had not been issued (electronically or on paper) on a stock exchange. 
Therefore, the administrator of the share register of FIH entered a note in the share register 
stating that all of Kaupthing’s holdings were pledged to the CBI. Written confirmation of this 
act was received by the CBI on October 6. A report from the CBI notes that Kaupthing ’s 
holdings in FIH amounted to 99.89% of the issued share capital in the bank (CBI 2019). 
When Kaupthing collapsed on the night of October 9, its holdings  in FIH that had been 
submitted as collateral remained in Kaupthing ’s liquidation estate. FIH remained in the 
liquidation estate as opposed to immediately being transferred to the CBI because of 
concerns regarding potential provisions in FIH’s foreign loan agreements that stipulated that 
ownership lenders could demand immediate repayment of loans upon change of ownership. 
Kaupthing’s resolution board (established on October 9) and the CBI agreed to look for a way 
to sell FIH, and JPMorgan was brought in as a consultant to find potential buyers, assist in 
valuing FIH, and document the process. The CBI agreed that it was in the best interest of FIH 
and the shareholders that FIH be transferred directly from Kaupthing’s liquidation estate to 
the prospective buyer and that the sale price would then go directly to the CBI to settle the 
cost of the loan (CBI 2019).  
220
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 21 ---
The part of the CBI responsible for addressing the sale of FIH was the CBI Holding Company, 
which was created to unwind assets that had been taken over by the CBI and the Treasury 
during the crisis (Benediktsdóttir, Eggertsson, and Þórarinsson 2017).  
Sales attempts in the last few months of 2008 were unsuccessful (CBI 2019) . In 2010, a 
consortium consisting of ATP, PFA, Folksam, and CP  Dyvig & Co. presented an offer to buy 
FIH (CBI 2010a). When negotiating the terms of the sale, Kaupthing and the CBI initially 
intended to receive at least the equivalent of EUR 550 million (the initial loan amount plus 
interest). The CBI and the consortium of buyers signed a purchase agreement on September 
18, 2010, and ownership of FIH was transferred over to the buyers on January 6, 2011 (CBI 
2019).  
Per the purchase agreement, w hen FIH was sold to its new owners, the CBI received a 
payment of approximately EUR 255 million (CBI 2019) . With the sale of FIH, the CBI 
recovered only about half of the emergency loan, resulting in a loss of ab out 2.5% of GDP 
(Benediktsdóttir, Eggertsson, and Þórarinsson 2017). 
There were other stipulations in the purchase agreement that potentially would have 
allowed the CBI to recover more of the loan amount (CBI 2019). The initial purchase price of 
FIH was EU R 670 million, and consisted of the EUR 255 million cash payout, an earn -out 
payout of up to EUR 415 million that would be adjusted for actual losses incurred by FIH 
until December 31, 2014, and an additional earn -out payment dependent on the buyer ’s 
realized gain on the investment in FIH at the latest on December 31, 2015 (CBI 2010a) . 
During the 2018 –2019 legislative session , the prime minister ’s office was asked about the 
status of the CBI’s recovery of the loan. There was no final status on the recovery of the funds, 
and while the CBI could potentially collect more recovery funds, it was very unlikely that any 
further collections would result in recoveries significantly exceeding the initial EUR 255 
million payout (Jakobsdóttir n.d.). 
11. Impact on Monetary P olicy Transmission: The euro-denominated liquidity 
provided to Kaupthing represented a significant portion of the CBI’s foreign 
exchange reserves, and the central bank was also attempting to peg the currency 
at ISK 131 to the euro, which ultimately failed.  
Before the GFC, more than two-thirds of lending and over three -quarters of deposits were 
denominated in foreign currency for the three largest banks in Iceland (Glitnir, Landsbanki, 
and Kaupthing). The central bank reserves denominated in foreign currency of were 21% of 
GDP—or, if  including a swap agreement with the Nordic countries and other committed 
credit lines, 35% of GDP. This meant that the CBI had limited resources for the emergency 
liquidity operations in terms of foreign exchange. The banks’ large foreign currency balance 
sheets and their size relative to the size of Iceland ’s GDP  were key vulnerabilities that 
contributed to their collapse (CBI 2010b). 
The liquidity granted to Kaupthing in euros amounted to about one -fifth of the country ’s 
entire foreign exchange reserves (Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020). In the October 6 
call between Oddsson and the prime minister, Oddsson mentioned that they could gather 
221
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 22 ---
EUR 500 million, which might support Kaupthing for four or five days, but it would prevent 
them from assisting Landsbanki (Seljan 2016).  
During a portion of the loan duration period (October 7 and 8), the CBI tried to create 
stability around the exchange rate  of the Icelandic kr ona (CBI 2008d) . The CBI was 
exchanging foreign currency at a rate of ISK 131 to the euro, which differed from the rate 
that had been established on the interbank market. On October 7, the bank sold EUR 6 million 
for ISK 786 million (CBI 2008c). However, on October 8, the CBI published another press 
release stating that the 131 kronur per euro exchange rate did not have enough support, and 
the CBI would be abandoning its attempts to peg the currency at that rate (CBI 2008d).  
The collapse of Kaupthing on October 9 represented the last of the three big banks to fail, 
and the domestic market therefore became disconnected from the offshore market, where 
the krona continued to depreciate (CBI 2010b).  
12. Other Conditions: The CBI did not impose any additional conditions on Kaupthing 
for the usage of the loan. 
In the 2019 document that the CBI published to review the loan, the central bank notes that 
it did not impose any additional conditions on Kaupthing for the usage of the loan. The loan 
was therefore added to Kaupthing’s liquid assets on October 6, 2008 , and was utilized a t 
Kaupthing’s discretion (CBI 2019).  
  
222
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 23 ---
References and Key Program Documents 
Legal/Regulatory Guidance 
(Icelandic Government 2001) Icelandic Government. 2001. Act on the Central Bank of 
Iceland, No. 36/2001. May 22, 2001. 
Central banking laws for the Central Bank of Iceland, 2001 (in Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5253 
(Icelandic Government 2008) Icelandic Government. 2008. Act on the Authority for 
Treasury Disbursements Due to Unusual Financial Market Circumstances Etc., No. 
125/2008. October 6, 2008. (Emergency Act). 
Act granting emergency authorization to the minister of finance to establish a new financial 
undertaking, take over a financial undertaking or its bankrupt estate—either wholly or in 
part. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/12757 
(Icelandic Government 2019) Icelandic Government. 2019. Act on the Central Bank of 
Iceland, No. 92/2019. July 1, 2019. 
Act from 2019 merging the FME into the CBI to enhance the stability and integrity of Iceland’s 
banking and financial systems. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5245 
Media Stories 
(Bjarnason 2019) Bjarnason, Freyr. 2019. “Not Incomprehensible Given the 
Circumstances.” Iceland Monitor, May 27, 2019. 
Article describing then CBI Governor Már Guðmundsson’s statements on the loan to 
Kaupthing. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5297 
(Brostrom 2008) Brostrom, Nina. 2008. “Borders Were Closed to Icelandic Banks.” 
Kauppalehti, October 9, 2008. 
Finnish news article reporting that the central bank of Finland blocked capital from 
Kaupthing from being returned to Iceland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5237 
(Davíðsdóttir 2009) Davíðsdóttir, Sigrún. 2009. “Emergency Loans and Questions without 
Answers.” RÚV, May 29, 2009. 
Article on the report from the CBI regarding the last-resort loan to Kaupthing (in Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5248 
(Elliott 2019) Elliott, Alexander D. 2019. “Emergency Loan to Kaupþing ‘Not Illegal.’” RÚV, 
May 28, 2019. 
News article on the decision that the CBI’s loan to Kaupthing was “not illegal.” 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5250 
223
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 24 ---
(Esmerk 2008) Esmerk Danish News (Esmerk). 2008. “Iceland: Emergency Legislation to 
Protect Bank Sector.” Esmerk Danish News, October 7, 2008. 
Announcement of the emergency legislation in Iceland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5251 
(Goodman 2008) Goodman, Matthew. 2008. “Kaupthing Finances Are Safe, Says Chief.” 
Sunday Times, October 5, 2008. 
Article discussing the Kaupthing chairman’s defense of the safety of the firm. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5252 
(Iceland Monitor 2017) Iceland Monitor. 2017. “Discussing the Fate of the Banking System.” 
Iceland Monitor, November 18, 2017. 
Transcript of the October 6, 2008 phone call between the then prime minister and head of the 
central bank of Iceland discussing the potential loan to Kaupthing (in Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5254 
(O’Dwyer 2022) O’Dwyer, Gerard. 2022. “Iceland: Rebuilding Trust.” Global Finance, 
January 29, 2022. 
Article discussing the rebound of the Icelandic economy. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5260 
(Pálsson 2019) Pálsson, Thorvarður. 2019. “Report on emergency loans to Kaupthing 
published.” RÚV, May 27, 2019, sec. Domestic. 
News article on the publishing of the CBI’s last resort loan report (in Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5236 
(Pollard 2008) Pollard, Niklas. 2008. “Kaupthing-Not Approached by Govt over 
Intervention.” Reuters, October 7, 2008. 
News article stating that Kaupthing had not been approached yet by the FME. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5263 
(RÚV 2008) RÚV. 2008. “Kastljós Tuesday, 7 October – Davíð Oddsson.” RÚV, October 7, 
2008. 
Interview with Davíð Oddsson, then chairman of the board of the Central Bank of Iceland (in 
Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5264 
(RÚV 2013) RÚV. 2013. “Why did the Central Bank Lend Kaupthing 500 Million Euros 6.10. 
2008?” RÚV, February 26, 2013. 
News article on the parliamentary committee’s investigation into Kaupthing’s loan (in 
Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5265 
  
224
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 25 ---
(Seljan 2016) Seljan, Helgi. 2016. “Says Kaupthing Loans Have Been Lost in Advance,” 
October 19, 2016. 
News article on the former prime minister of Iceland, Davíð Oddsson, and his testimony on the 
emergency loan to Kaupthing. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5266 
Press Releases/Announcements 
(CBI 2008a) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2008a. “Monetary Policy Statement by the Board 
of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland: The Central Bank of Iceland Raises Its Policy 
Rate.” Press release, March 25, 2008. 
Press release announcing that the Central Bank of Iceland is raising its policy rate to 15%. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5296 
(CBI 2008b) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2008b. “Temporary Suspension from Trading.” 
Press release, October 6, 2008. 
CBI press release announcing the suspension from trading on the regulated market of all 
financial instruments issued by a number of Icelandic banks, including Kaupthing. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5241 
(CBI 2008c) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2008c. “Foreign Exchange Market.” Press 
release, October 8, 2008. 
CBI press release on efforts to stabilize the Icelandic krona (in Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5290 
(CBI 2008d) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2008d. “More about the Foreign Exchange 
Market.” Press release, October 8, 2008. 
CBI press release announcing the conclusion of efforts to peg the Icelandic krona (in 
Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5240 
(CBI 2008e) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2008e. “Comments on Comments by Björgólfur 
Thor Björgólfsson on Landsbanki Íslands’ Request for Facilities from the Central Bank of 
Iceland.” Press release, October 27, 2008. 
Press release announcing that the CBI had rejected Landsbanki’s request for emergency 
liquidity assistance but had granted Kaupthing’s request for a loan (in Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5238 
(CBI 2010a) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2010a. “FIH to Be Sold to a Consortium of ATP, 
PFA, Folksam and CP Dyvig.” Press release, September 19, 2010. 
CBI press release on the sale of FIH in 2010. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5244 
  
225
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 26 ---
(FME 2008a) Icelandic Financial Supervisory Authority (Fjármálaeftirlitið, or FME). 2008a. 
“Icelandic Banks Pass the FME Stress Test.” Press release, August 14, 2008. 
Press release stating that the four largest banks passed the regular stress test of the Icelandic 
Financial Surpervisory Authority. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5256 
(FME 2008b) Icelandic Financial Supervisory Authority (Fjármálaeftirlitið, or FME). 2008b. 
“Based on New Legislation, the Icelandic Financial Supervisory Authority Proceeds to Take 
Control of Kaupþing to Ensure Continued Commercial Bank Operations in Iceland.” Press 
release, October 9, 2008. 
Press release stating that the FME is taking control of Kaupthing. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5255 
(Haarde 2008) Haarde, Geir. 2008. “Address to the Nation by H.E. Geir H. Haarde, Prime 
Minister of Iceland.” Speech Delivered from the Prime Minister’s Office, Reykjavik, Iceland, 
October 6, 2008. 
Speech announcing the full guarantee of all insured deposits within Iceland. The guarantee 
did not specify the Icelandic state’s treatment of deposits located in foreign branches. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/13155 
(HM Treasury 2008) HM Treasury. 2008. “Kaupthing Singer & Friedlander.” Press release, 
October 8, 2008. 
Press release announcing that the UK FSA is taking over KSF. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5232 
(Jakobsdóttir n.d.) Jakobsdóttir, Katrín. n.d. “Response: Prime Minister to a Question from 
Jón Steindór Valdimarsson.” 
Response of Iceland’s prime minister at the time, Katrín Jakobsdóttir, to questions regarding 
CBI’s loan to Kaupthing during the 149th legislative session of 2018-2019 (in Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5257 
(Kaupthing 2008a) Kaupthing Bank (Kaupthing). 2008a. “Kaupthing Bank: No Indication of 
Government Intervention.” Dow Jones Newswires, October 7, 2008. 
Press release from Kaupthing Bank following the Emergency Act. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5249 
(Kaupthing 2008b) Kaupthing Bank (Kaupthing). 2008b. “Kaupthing Bank’s Results for 
2007.” Press release, January 31, 2008. 
Press release from Kaupthing disclosing the banks result for 2007. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5259 
(Sveriges Riksbank 2008) Sveriges Riksbank. 2008. “Riksbank Grants Liquidity Assistance 
to Kaupthing Bank Sverige AB.” Press release, October 8, 2008. 
Press release detailing the Riksbank’s liquidity assistance to Kaupthing Bank Sverige AB. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5295 
  
226
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 27 ---
Reports/Assessments 
(BCBS 2010) Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). 2010. “Report and 
Recommendations of the Cross-Border Bank Resolution Group.” Bank for International 
Settlements, March 18, 2010. 
Set of resolution recommendations published by the Basel Committee. 
http://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2598 
(CBI 2008f) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2008f. Financial Stability Report 2008. 
Central Bank of Iceland financial stability report for 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5239 
(CBI 2009) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2009. Annual Report 2008. 
Annual report by the CBI for 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5289 
(CBI 2010b) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2010b. Economy of Iceland 2010. 
Annual report on the economy of Iceland published by the CBI. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5243 
(CBI 2019) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). 2019. The Emergency Lending to Kaupthing. 
Report from the Central Bank of Iceland on the loan provided to Kaupthing on October 6, 
2008 (in Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5246 
(Flannery 2009) Flannery, Mark J. 2009. Iceland’s Failed Banks: A Post-Mortem. Icelandic 
Special Investigation Commission. 
A postmortem of the Icelandic banking sector written for the SIC. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5233 
(FME 2009) Icelandic Financial Supervisory Authority (Fjármálaeftirlitið, or FME). 2009. 
The Financial Supervisory Authority Annual Report 2009.  
FME annual report for the year ended June 30, 2009. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/13153 
(IMF 2008) International  Monetary Fund (IMF). 2008. “Iceland: Financial System Stability 
Assessment—Update.” IMF Country Report No. 08/368, December 2008. 
An IMF report discussing the state of financial stability in Iceland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5234 
(Kaupthing 2004) Kaupthing Bank (Kaupthing). 2004. Kaupthing Offering Circular. 
Audited consolidated financial statements for the financial year ending December 31, 2003. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5258 
  
227
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher

--- Page 28 ---
(Parliamentary Budget Committee 2013) Parliamentary Budget Committee. 2013. Report 
of the Majority of the Budget Committee to Alþingi on the Central Bank of Iceland’s Loan to 
Kaupþing HF. October 6, 2008. 
Report to Icelandic Parliament by the Budget Committee on the CBI’s lending to Kaupthing (in 
Icelandic). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5261 
(Parliamentary Research Committee 2010) Parliamentary Research Committee. 2010. 
Antecedents and Causes of the Collapse of the Icelandic Banks in 2008 and Related Events. 
Parliamentary report on the causes of the Icelandic banking system. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5262 
(SIC 2010) Special Investigation Commission (SIC). 2010. Report of the Special 
Investigation Commission. 
Overview of the SIC report to parliament on Iceland’s crisis. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/881 
(Valgreen et al. 2006) Valgreen, Carsten, Lars Christensen, Peter Possing Andersen, and 
Rene Kallestrup (Valgreen et al.). 2006. “Iceland: Geyser Crisis.” Danske Bank, March 21, 
2006. 
A report by Danske Bank discussing the potential for a financial crisis in Iceland. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5235 
Key Academic Papers 
(Baudino, Sturluson, and Svoronos 2020) Baudino, Patrizia, Jon Thor Sturluson, and Jean-
Philippe Svoronos. 2020. “The Banking Crisis in Iceland.” Bank for International 
Settlements, Financial Stability Institute Crisis Management Series No. 1, March 2020. 
BIS paper discussing Iceland’s crisis and responses. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/13131 
(Benediktsdóttir, Eggertsson, and Þórarinsson 2017) Benediktsdóttir, Sigríður, Gauti B. 
Eggertsson, and Eggert Þórarinsson. 2017. “The Rise, Fall, and Resurrection of Iceland: A 
Postmortem Analysis of the 2008 Financial Crisis.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 
September 2017. 
Paper analyzing the rapid growth of the Icelandic banking system and its collapse in 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/874 
(Hoffner 2023) Hoffner, Benjamin. 2023. “Scandinavia: Central Bank Swaps to Iceland, 
2008.” Journal of Financial Crises 5, no. 1: 380–401. 
A YPFS case study on the central bank swaps to Iceland in 2008. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol5/iss1/15 
  
228
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 29 ---
(Ingves 2022) Ingves, Stefan. 2022. “Lessons Learned Interview by Maryanne Haggerty and 
Carey Mott, December 6, 2022.” Transcript. Yale Program on Financial Stability Lessons 
Learned Oral History Project. 
YPFS interview with Stefan Ingves, discussing swaps with the CBI. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2276 
(Kelly et al. 2025) Kelly, Steven, Vincient Arnold, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew Metrick. 2025. 
“Survey of Ad Hoc Emergency Liquidity Programs." Journal of Financial Crises 7, no. 1.  
Survey of YPFS case studies examining the provision of ad hoc emergency liquidity.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/3/ 
(Kulam 2022) Kulam, Adam. 2022. “Iceland: Depositors’ and Investors’ Guarantee Fund. ” 
Journal of Financial Crises 4, no. 2: 371–98.  
YPFS case study about the Icelandic deposit guarantee scheme.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/13/ 
(Wiggins et al. 2022) Wiggins, Rosalind Z., Sean Fulmer, Greg Feldberg, and Andrew 
Metrick. 2022. “Broad-Based Emergency Liquidity Programs.” Journal of Financial Crises 4, 
no. 2: 86–178. 
Survey of YPFS case studies examining broad-based emergency liquidity programs. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol4/iss2/3 
Other 
(CBI n.d.) Central Bank of Iceland (CBI). n.d. “Key Interest Rate (%) Rate on 7-Day 
Collateralised Lending.” 
Rate on seven day collateralized lending on October 6, 2008, as published by the CBI. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5247 
  
Copyright 2025 © Yale University. All rights reserved. To order copies of this material or to receive 
permission to reprint any or all of this document, please contact the Yale Program on Financial 
Stability at ypfs@yale.edu. 
229
Kaupthing Alden and Brougher