--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 3 
2025 
Stressing the Stress Tests Stressing the Stress Tests 
Natasha Sarin 
Yale Law School and Yale School of Management 
Til Schuermann 
Oliver Wyman 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Sarin, Natasha and Schuermann, Til (2025) "Stressing the Stress Tests," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 
: Iss. 3, 20-49. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1666 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss3/2 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol7/iss3/2

--- Page 3 ---
Stressing the Stress Tests 
Natasha Sarin1 and Til Schuermann2 
Abstract 
In the spring of 2023, Silicon Valley Bank, Signature Bank, and First Republic Bank failed, 
owing to predictable rate hikes by the Federal Reserve. It’s clear from these recent events 
that the current US stress-testing system is ill -suited to mitigate risk associated with the 
banking system, especially when looking at smaller regional banks that aren’t subjugated to 
annual stress testing. Stress testing as a regulatory tool is also exposed to significant legal 
risks following recent Supreme Court jurisprudence that draws into question the viability of 
the status quo. 
Today, regulators and other interested parties must change tacks to craft a stress testing 
regime that is fit for purpose. This article seeks to inform that debate by laying out key 
features of a successful stre ss testing program against which we assess the current regime 
in the United States. We make four recommendations: (1) using multiple scenarios to allow 
exploration of a wider set of risks; (2) disclosing (stressed) fair value for the assessment of 
all securities held on banks ’ balance sheets; (3) stress testing of funding and liquidity risk; 
and (4) subjecting more banks to the stress tests. Taken together, these reforms would 
usefully improve the dynamism of the financial regulatory regime.  
Keywords: bank capital, banking regulation, financial crisis, interest rate risk, stress tests 
JEL Classifications: G21, G28 
 
  
 
1 Natasha Sarin, Professor, Yale Law School and Yale School of Management, natasha.sarin@yale.edu. 
2 Til Schuermann, Partner and Global Head  of Finance and Risk Practice, Oliver Wyman, 
Til.Schuermann@oliverwyman.com. 
 
20

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction 
In t he spring of 2023 , the United States experienced  saw the second -, third -, and fourth-
largest bank failures in its history. It was the first real test of the bank regulatory regime 
created after the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–2009 (GFC), formalized through the Dodd–
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection  Act (Dodd-Frank).3 But weaknesses in 
the financial regulatory regime remain, and they were on display in the spring of 2023 when 
the government ultimately was forced to step in and address the crisis.4 Even more troubling, 
the 2023 crisis was not caused by some unforeseeable event. Instead, bank failures were 
caused by the simplest of all shocks —the effect of the Federal Reserve ’s following through 
on its clearly announced promise to raise interest rates sharply to combat inflation.  
It should not have been that hard to see that quickly rising interest rates would create 
problems for some banks. The conventional wisdom is that banks benefit from a steep yield 
curve, when long -term interest rates (where they lend) are much higher than s hort-term 
ones (where they borrow). When the Fed raises rates, it does so on the short end of the curve, 
typically moving the entire yield curve up. What at first seems bad for banks is actually good 
since deposits are very slow to reprice. Thus, for banks, the yield curve effectively steepens, 
giving a boost to net interest income. 5 However, for existing long -dated assets that sit on 
banks’ books, their (fair) value declines.  
Some banks hold many such assets, particularly securities that are relatively liquid and have 
low to no credit risk ( for example , US Treasury bonds), in part because regulation 
encourages them to do so. Losses on these assets can overwhelm the gains banks receive 
from lending’s becoming more profitable.  
This situation was made more precarious by the fact that many financial institutions were 
funded through large, uninsured deposits that are more sensitive to repricing as rates rise 
than are retail, insured deposits. According to bank call reports, t he share of uninsured 
deposits rose from 20% in 2010 to 45% by year-end 2022, on average, but with significant 
cross-sectional variation. Specifically, Silicon Valley Bank  (SVB) and Signature Bank, which 
ultimately failed, were at the tail of the distribution with uninsured deposit shares o f 94% 
and 89%, respectively. 
Recent failures occurred in a regulatory regime that, at least in theory, has a mechanism in 
the annual stress tests meant to ensure that at least the largest financial institutions have 
sufficient capital to withstand severely adverse shocks. And the risks that triggered financial 
 
3 The Basel Committee stated that the 2023 banking turmoil, the most significant stress on the system since the 
Global Financial Crisis, highlighted flaws in the regulatory paradigm governing financial institutions  (BCBS 
2023).  
4 To stop the banking crisis from spreading, the Federa l Reserve established a new emergency lending facility 
(the Bank Term Funding Program), at implicitly subsidized rates, to provide loans to eligible depository 
institutions. The Fed, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC) and the Treasury together pledged to 
protect depositors to forestall contagious bank runs.  
5 This is referred to as the deposit franchise of banks, and its value manifests precisely in a rising -rate 
environment. 
21
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
distress should not have been a surprise to either bank risk managers or bank supervisors: 
the Federal Reserve had been signaling clearly that interest rates would need to rise 
following an increase i n inflation in mid -2021. Indeed, in the months leading up to SVB ’s 
collapse, regulators were flagging the hundreds of billions of dollars in unrealized losses on 
available-for-sale (AFS) and held-to-maturity (HTM) securities that those rate increases had 
precipitated.6 The increased reliance on uninsured deposits was also known, as it was 
reported quarterly in bank regulatory reports. These were risks hiding in plain sight, in stark 
contrast to the opaque risks embedded in securitizations that triggered the Global Financial 
Crisis in 2007.7 
The success of the crisis stress tests in boosting confidence in the nation ’s largest financial 
institutions encouraged policymakers to regularize annual stress testing, and it has become 
the most important element of the post -crisis regulatory regime. Bank regulation is 
extremely complex, with the largest banks complying with at least 10 distinct capital 
requirements.8 But the stress test capital requirement is the binding constraint for most 
institutions subject to the tests, and the stress tests are at the forefront of the regulatory 
regime as the only possible vehicle to glean a forward -looking assessment of losses t hat 
could accumulate during a crisis. 
Despite their centrality in the regulatory edifice, the annual stress tests had not considered 
the impact of higher interest rates 9 or flighty deposits on bank safety. Clearly then, one 
takeaway from the recent period is that the stress-testing regime encoded in Dodd-Frank Act 
Stress Testing (DFAST) in 2010 and amended with the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, 
and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) in 2019 was ill -designed to detect and protect 
against the vulnerabilities in the banking system in 2023. It is also the case that even  if the 
stress tests had been designed to screen banks for these risks, they would have been 
ineffective at identifying problems at regional banks like SVB, since annual stress testing is 
reserved for banks with more than $250 billion in total assets.10 
When evaluating a stress-testing regime, there are two important steps: how is it designed, 
and how are the results used? Perhaps the most important design feature is 
comprehensiveness. Does the stress test comprehensively cover all relevant and significant 
 
6 “Unrealized losses on available -for-sale and held -to-maturity securities totaled $690 billion, up 47 percent 
from second quarter 2022” (Gruenberg 2022). 
7 See Cheng and Wessel (2018), which quotes former Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson as arguing that “crises 
are unpredictable in terms of cause or timing or the severity when they hit.” But see Sarin (2021), which argues 
that, in actuality, the Global Financial Crisis—and banking crises generally —can be well  predicted by market 
measures that are leading indicators of financial distress. Indeed, Sarin argues for the effectiveness of forward-
looking market measures and the predictability of financial crises and cautions against a regulatory regime that 
continues to ignore their importance.  
8 “The largest banks must comply with at least ten distinct capital requirements, as well as liquidity 
requirements and many other rules” (Greenwood et al. 2017). 
9 In 2013 and 2015, the less severe “adverse” scenario did incl ude a rate -rise environment. In 2020, Dodd-
Frank Act Stress Testing moved to a single scenario. 
10 Banks between $100 billion and $250 billion in total assets are subjected to biannual stress testing, and banks 
below $100 billion are exempt from supervisory stress testing entirely. 
22
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 6 ---
risks, both at an individual bank and at the core banking system as a whole? This is often 
referred to as the micro - and macroprudential perspective. The comprehensiveness 
criterion implicitly forces the delineation of the “core” banking system: which banks need to 
be included, and which can one safely exclude? 
Once the results are in hand, how should they be used? At a minimum, stress testing is a 
valuable information tool: these results show the key risks in the system and how the stress-
tested banks fare in the face of these risks. This information can be kept privately with the 
banks and their supervisors, or it can also be disclosed to the public to allow for better 
monitoring. A step further would be to use the results for setting capital requirements. This, 
in turn, can be a direct linkage —bank X must hold Y% or $Z in capital —or it can used as an 
input to that capital requirement.  
Both of these steps —design comprehensiveness and use —come with many choices 
involving trade-offs. How many scenarios, how many banks, how often, and so on. But stress 
testing is not costless and subject to diminishing returns. And the answer may be different 
in the middle of a crisis (financial “wartime”), when the set of relevant risks to test is quite 
clear, versus during financial peacetime, when the range of risks is far less clear, and it may 
take more scenarios applied to more banks to gain a useful picture of the state of the banking 
system.11  
In our vie w, the current stress -testing regime is not sufficiently comprehensive, neither in 
the range of risks nor the range of banks that are covered.  The business of banking —
borrowing short and lending long —means banks are exposed to three key financial risks: 
interest rate risk, liquidity risk , and credit risk. Therefore, any regulatory regime, any risk 
management program, and any stress -testing scheme would need to address all three of 
these risks. Current stress testing is quite effective at testing resilience to credit risk but less 
so to liquidity and interest rate risk. This is a weakness that a better -designed and more 
broadly applied stress test could usefully address. The Federal Reserve ’s stress -testing 
program is undergoing a redesign as of this writing. For instance, the Fed has already added 
additional exploratory scenarios in addition to the stress scenario that determines a bank ’s 
capital requirement. Other changes may also be forthcoming. We aim to provide a 
framework against which to assess those proposed changes. 
 Our proposed menu of reforms, which we detail at greater length in this paper, would call 
for:  
• More scenarios: the Dodd–Frank Act required the Federal Reserve to design and 
stress banks against two stress scenarios in addition to the baseline scenario. 
With the Tailoring Rule following passage of the EGRRCPA, the number of stress 
scenarios was reduced to one. But it is impossible to characterize with any 
 
11 See Schuermann (2016), which notes the fundamentally different purpose served by stress-testing exercises 
in times of crisis and exercises in peacetime aimed at identifying and addressing future risks. See also Judge 
(2022), which describes the critical role stress tests play in crisis containment  in chapter 12. During wartime, 
stress testing gives regulators a clearer picture of fundamental weaknesses in the system whereas during 
peacetime, early signals provide guidance, for example, on which asset classes to monitor.  
23
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
precision the stresses that banks are likely to undergo in crisis; stress scen arios 
are not forecasts, but they are draws of what could plausibly happen. In order for 
them to help safeguard against the broadest range of potential risks on the 
horizon, the best that can be done is stressing banks to a range of adverse 
conditions. At a minimum, a stress-testing regime needs to adequately probe a 
bank’s (and banking system ’s) resilience to credit, liquidity , and interest rate 
exposures. To adequately cover the risks faced by the banking system, we suggest 
increasing the number of scenarios to a minimum of three. 
• Full fair value treatment of securities :12 At present, while all securities held by 
banks are fair valued, and those value changes are disclosed, only some of those 
value changes are reflected in capital as dictated by accounting rules. That means 
that banks can experience significant losses that deplete their economic capital 
position (measured on a fair value basis) without this being reflected in their 
regulatory capital. Importantly, changes in the fair value securities held i n the 
hold-to-maturity book do not flow through to capital. For the available -for-sale 
book, fair value changes flow through to capital only for the largest banks. 13 Yet 
market participants will include any such fair value changes in their own 
solvency assessments of banks in times of turmoil. Our proposal is to account for 
the fair value of HTM securities in the stress scenario only. Our proposal is to 
disclose the impact of a mark -to-stress across the securities portfolio in a stress 
tangible common equit y ( TCE) ratio across all scenarios, which will have the 
effect of inflating capital ratios relative to prevailing accounting standards in a 
rates-down scenario and depressing them relative to prevailing accounting 
standards in a rates -up scenario. We belie ve these disclosures themselves —
without any new capital requirement —will provide valuable information to the 
market about financial stability in different potential stress moments.  
• More explicit stress testing of bank funding and liquidity : DFAST-style st ress 
testing focuses largely on asset quality under stress. Full balance sheet dynamics, 
which include funding , enter through net interest income calculations but with 
only minimal exploration of funding challenges encountered in a severely 
adverse scenario. Richer exploration of these dynamics, in particular how quickly 
deposits are likely to leave as interest rates rise via deposit betas (the change in 
deposits as interest rates change) and the potential speed of outflows in times of 
distress, are needed to cover bank vulnerabilities to shocks more 
comprehensively.  
 
In addition, we propose including a liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) check in every 
projection period in the stress test. Since banks have to meet an LCR requirement 
 
12 We will use the broader term “fair value ” rather than “mark to market ” to distinguish from trading book 
demands of marking positions to prevailing market prices. Of course, fair valuation looks primarily to m arket 
prices in determining an appropriate—fair—valuation, so the two concepts are closely related.  
13 The Basel III Endgame proposed rules will take a step in this direction, subjecting all banks larger than $100 
billion in total assets to capital fluctuations stemming from changes in the fair value of AFS securities.  
24
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 8 ---
anyway, they would have to meet that requirement in a period of stress. Imposing 
an LCR check is a straightforward way to introduce liquidity into the more 
capital-oriented stress-testing program. 
• More banks should be stress tested—and every year: At present, only banks above 
the $250 billion asset threshold are subject to annual stress tests. Banks between 
$100 billion and$ 250 billion in assets (so -called Category IV banks) are stress 
tested every other year. At a minimum , we advocate for annual stress testin g of 
Category IV banks. We would ideally include all banks above $10 billion in assets, 
since there are several banks in the $10  billion–$100 billion range that have 
suffered significant deposit outflows since the SVB episode and whose failure 
could trigge r contagion. Since stress testing is not costless, for banks at 
$10billion–$100 billion , we propose a lighter version of the large bank stress -
testing program be developed. 
We also consider how these tests are used to determine capital requirements. Here , we 
briefly raise the legal challenges that the current edifice of stress testing is exposed to,14 and 
we note that these threats may push against the kind of innovative reforms that we would 
like to see the regulatory community make so stress testing can a chieve its promise of a 
dynamic and forward -looking assessment of financial stability. Specifically, the banking 
industry’s push for the implementation of “notice and comment ” for stress-testing models 
would impede the dynamism we envision for stress testi ng. One way to address this 
challenge could be to decouple stress test results from bank capital requirements, as some 
have suggested.15 While there are real virtues to such an approach, we believe at this time 
the benefits do not outweigh the costs, as we  are skeptical of putting more pressure on 
supervisors to deploy information from the stress tests affirmatively to bolster banks that 
suffer from capital inadequacy. Instead, we would support maintaining the direct tie 
between capital levels and stress te st results, and we are heartened by the approach 
regulators are taking to stressing against new risks in “exploratory” scenarios.  
Reforming stress tests along the lines that we suggest is a tall order. Further, forward -
looking or “peacetime” stress tests pose unique challenges for regulators when compared to 
their crisis counterparts. During a crisis, the types of risk banks face are relatively well  
identified because we are living through them. Stress tests designed ex ante—particularly if 
 
14 For years, large financial institutions and industry trade groups have claimed that the stress tests violate the 
Administrative Procedure Act by creating a binding rule in bank capital requ irements but not subjecting 
scenarios and stress test models to notice -and-comment rulemaking. Indeed, they filed a lawsuit in December 
2024 laying out these arguments. See Bank Policy Institute v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
(2024). In response, see Fed (2024c), where the Federal Reserve announced that it would seek public comment 
on changes to improve the transparency of bank stress tests in response to the changing legal landscape . 
15 See Wessel (2023) for a discussion with former Federal Reserve Governor Daniel Tarullo noting that “there’s 
an increasingly compelling case for shifting back to using point -in-time capital requirements as the binding 
constraints upon banks and using stress testing more to prov ide information to supervisors about the 
resilience of banks under a variety of possible stresses, without automatically tying the results to minimum 
capital requirements.” See also Tarullo (2024), which makes explicit the merits of decoupling stress tests from 
regular capital requirements, including fostering dynamism in stress testing and removing institutional 
barriers from conducting more customized tests in light of financial and economic shocks.  
25
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
they are forced  to go through notice -and-comment rulemaking—may never be creative or 
flexible enough to respond to the particular questions markets have about banks in future 
moments of distress.  
Our paper proceeds as follows. Section II explains how stress testing can, theoretically, help 
identify latent weaknesses in the financial system. Section III outlines reforms to stress 
testing that would increase its efficacy, as well as a discussion of some of the behavioral, 
administrative, and legal challenges; and Section IV provides some brief concluding remarks. 
The banking turmoil in the spring of 2023 exposed broad weaknesses in the US regulatory 
and supervisory architecture. Our focus will be on stress testing, but a cogent discussion  of 
this important tool needs to touch on other shortcomings in the regulatory regime, including 
the relationship between capital and liquidity regulation, the appropriate design of a lender-
of-last-resort function, and how best to manage the run risk given the significant presence of 
uninsured deposits in the financial system. We raise these briefly in conclusion, but they are 
important areas that merit considerable attention.  
II. Stress Testing: (In Theory) A Tool for Dynamic Regulation 
All capital regimes s eek to capitalize banks sufficiently to withstand severe shocks and be 
able to absorb unexpected losses. 16 The question of “how much capital ” is tied closely to 
“how risky is the balance sheet ” and “how dangerous is the world ” and, importantly, “how 
severe of a shock or series of shocks” should banks be expected to survive while still fulfilling 
their role as credit intermediaries in the economy. Embedded in the calibration is a risk 
appetite by the official sector: the lower the risk appetite, the more res ilient the banks need 
to be, the more severe the shocks they need to be able to withstand, and therefore the more 
capital they need to hold. Capital functions as self -insurance for banks against downturns. 
So, a question regulators grapple with is how far out in the tail banks should be forced to 
self-insure before (in extreme cases) the official sector ultimately is forced to step in. Banks 
could be required to finance themselves with 100 % capital, but then they would no longer 
be banks as we understand them, as they would have no debt financing (like deposits). Those 
who have called for much higher capital requirements have suggested in the neighborhood 
of 30% equity financing, which would be about three times average capital levels today.17 
A crucial component of a capital requirement is not just its level but also how best to measure 
it. In the run -up to the GFC, banks held capital based on the assessed risk of their asset 
portfolios, with a rather abstract view of the severity of shocks and no specificity on the kinds 
 
16 Capital sits as a layer of protection for bank credito rs: a bank ’s capital position equals the amount of asset 
losses banks can experience before they are no longer able to pay creditors, including especially depositors, in 
full. 
17 The cost of drastically higher capital requirements would be less intermediati on, at least by banks, in that 
there would be fewer bank deposits being turned into longer -term investments like loans. Scholars like Anat 
Admati argue that these costs are overstated . “[Q]uite simply, bank equity is not expensive from a social 
perspective, and high leverage is not required in order for banks to perform all their socially valuable functions, 
including lending, taking deposits, and issuing money-like securities” (Snyder 2010). 
26
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 10 ---
of dangerous scenarios the world might offer up. During the GFC, it became clear that banks 
that were well  capitalized according to the prevailing regulatory capital regime were 
understood by the market as instead dangerously clo se to insolvency given emerging risks 
and market conditions.18  
The crisis and its progeny precipitated the realization that the existing regulatory capital 
regime failed spectacularly at identifying weak banks, so a different approach was needed: 
enter stress testing.19  
The idea behind using stress tests as a method to assess capital adequacy was to directly 
address the questions of bank stability, in a dynamic way, by considering scenarios relevant 
to banks’ vulnerabilities in the current environment. Stress scenarios are explicit, concrete , 
and easily understood; the official sector risk appetite is clearly expressed through both the 
severity of the scenario and the post -stress capital requirement. The more severe the 
scenario and the higher the post -stress requirement, the lower the appetite for a risky 
banking system. In this way, stress testing is just another risk -weighting algorithm, albeit 
bespoke to the risks facing financial institutions  at a point in  time.20, 21 For example, if the 
regulator views that risks in commercial real estate (CRE) are especially high, with growing 
vulnerabilities by the banks, it can simply increase the shock severity in the CRE index. 
Limited Dynamism in the Current Stress-Testing Regime 
Given that stress testing is essentially a more bespoke risk -weighting algorithm, one of its 
virtues is that it allows capital levels to be calculated and adjusted in the face of evolving 
risks that are poorly captured by more static regulato ry risk-weighting approaches. And to 
 
18 See Sarin (2021) for discussion. Then–Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Chairman Christopher Cox 
famously noted that Bear Stearns was “well-capitalized and apparently fully liquid ” at the time of its collapse  
(Cox 2008); the CFO of Lehman  Brothers noted in June 2008, a few months before the firm ’s failure, that  by 
regulatory capital measures, Lehman was “extremely well capitalized to take advantage of  . . . new market 
opportunities” (Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. 2008). While these institutions were primarily regulated by the 
SEC, the same has been true for bank holding companies that were in distress during the financial crisis and 
since then. 
19 To be sure, Dodd -Frank included a host of important reforms, including the creation of the Consumer 
Financial Protection Bureau. But the stress tests are generally regarded as “a cornerstone of post -crisis 
prudential regulation” because of their unique ability to provide forward -looking assessments of bank health 
(Tarullo 2016).  
20 Many bank capital requirements are based on risk weights, such that riskier assets are assigned higher capital 
charges. The idea is that banks will need more of a buffer against potential losses when assets are riskier “[T]he 
reason regulators use [risk-weighted assets] in addition to total assets is because some assets are inherently 
riskier than others. Without risk weighting, banks would have an incentive to hold riskier assets, as the same 
amount of capital must be held against riskier and safer asse ts” (Scott and Labonte 2023).  
21 For an expanded discussion comparing pre - and post-GFC capital regimes and the role of stress testing, see 
Schuermann (2020), which notes that following the financial crisis, there was a shift to a capital regime that 
included the idea of layers or buffers of capital to protect against waves of losses, and the widespread use of 
stress testing. Because stress tests set the de facto capital requirement for financial institutions subject to these 
tests, choices made about the s everity and scope of stress scenarios are immensely important for how the 
capital regime operates on the ground , Scott and Labonte (2023) notes that “the stress test is currently the 
binding [capital] constraint.” 
27
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
be fair, the status quo includes a degree of dynamism: A good example is the 2023 DFAST 
scenario. One of the growing risks facing banks in the wake of the pandemic is exposure to 
CRE, downtown office space in particular , following the shift from working in an office to 
more working from home. Meanwhile, the secular shift to online shopping away from in -
person retail accelerated during the pandemic. This has the effect of favoring industrial 
warehousing, strategically placed near metropolitan areas to rapidly deliver goods ordered 
online directly to households and hurting brick-and-mortar retail. The growth of large-scale 
data centers to support cloud computing is another such example. Yet they are all 
“commercial real estate,” which receives the same singular risk weight for regulatory capital 
purposes.22 
The stress test allows for more tailoring to risks that have not yet materialized but plausibly 
might: DFAST-2023 saw a 40% decline in the commercial real estate price index (Figure 1).23 
Since this is an index, it describes the average decline across all types of CRE. Some would 
decline more (like downtown office space), some much less (like industrial warehousing). 
Overall, CRE losses over the nine -quarter DFAST horizon were projected by the Fed to be 
8.8% while the projected loss rates for office were around 20% for 2023 (Figure 2). Projected 
office loss rates were much closer to the overall CRE loss rates in the supervisory stress 
scenarios before the pandemic. Stress testing is ideally suited for this kind of tailoring to 
evolving risks—but only if the risks are reflected in the scenario s and their translation to 
loss rates. 
  
 
22 There are some exceptions such as certain multifamily housing mortgages (lower) and high -volatility CRE 
such as land development (higher). 
23 For a description of the DFAST -2024 stress scenario that also imposes a 40% decline in the CRE index, see 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2024). 
28
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 12 ---
Figure 1: Commercial Real Estate, Severely Adverse Scenario 
 
Notes: Left panel is in levels, right in changes relative to jump-off point; PQ0: prediction quarter zero. 
Source: Fed 2025a. 
Figure 2: Commercial Real Estate, Office Space, Loss Rates in DFAST 
 
Source: Fed 2025a. 
Static Stress Scenarios 
Effective stress testing first identifies the risks and vulnerabilities of the bank (or 
banking/financial system) and then tailors a scenario or set of scenarios that are severely 
adverse but plausible to probe the bank ’s (system’s) resilience. As the business, client , and 
product mix of the bank evolves, so too will its risk profile and thus its vulnerabilities.  
29
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
These changes happen in the context of evolving risks in the economy and financial markets. 
A good stress scenario combines these two aspects: If the macroeconomic risks are complex 
and multidimensional and the banking system has a mix of banks with rather different 
business models (for example, investment banks with sales and trading operations, trust and 
custody banks with large operational deposits but little lending, regional commercial banks 
with traditional banking activities but no capital markets operations , card issuers) , then 
designing a single scenario to cover the range of risks is impossible. Indeed, nearly every 
year, the DFAST exercise in the US has one or more ban ks that register as building their 
capital base through the Fed’s stress scenario rather than depleting it. 
But the current approach to stress testing does not make adequate use of even the one 
scenario it is able to deploy.  
As former Federal Reserve Governor Dan Tarullo has highlighted , “shifts in activities of 
banks and in the economy create a dynamic set of risks. Effective prudential regulation must 
be equally dynamic.” (Tarullo 2016). In concept, the stress tests are a vehicle for this type of 
dynamism because their annual structure allows regulators to revisit the scope and location 
of latent risks in the banking sector to determine how best to design scenarios that test 
financial institution resiliency.  
But the stress tests have failed on this front. The supervisory stress scenario in DFAST, which 
is rooted in the experience of the GFC, has remained largely the same over time: the same 
shape in the evolution of risk factors, very sim ilar severities, similar joint paths of the 
approximately three dozen risk factors. We excerpt a few in Figure 3 to show their similarity 
over time. Note that historical data does not include restatements , to preserve the jump-off 
point for historical DFAST scenarios. 
  
30
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 3: Select Macro Risk Factors in DFAST, 2001–2025  
  
  
Source: Fed 2025a. 
Because the stylized scenario is a GFC-style severe recession combined with a broad flight to 
quality in financial assets, interest rates are projected to decline as monetary policy responds 
to an adverse real and financial shock ( bottom right panel in Figure 3 ). A scenario of 
stubbornly high inflation combined with persistent high interest rates had not been 
proposed until the full introduction of explorato ry scenarios with DFAST -2024. As such, 
interest rate risk is not really factored into the exercise, even though rates have been rising 
since early 2022 and are contributing to banks ’ vulnerabilities by decreasing the value of 
their securities and loan port folios and reducing the stability of short -term liabilities, 
including deposits. 
Using a very similar set of stress scenarios year after year may also disincentivize banks from 
investing in their own risk management as the test becomes predictable, and may encourage 
concentration across the system in assets that receive comparably lighter treatment in the 
test (Barr 2023) akin to a systematic shift into certain banking activities that happen to be 
favored by the existing regulatory risk -weighting (capital) regime, as was the case prior to 
31
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
the GFC with complex securitization. Risks build up over time, and a flexible forward-looking 
stress-testing approach is able to uncover and address such risks. 
III. How to Improve Supervisory Stress Testing 
At the beginning of 2023 when the DFAST scenario was being designed, there were four key 
risks facing the banking system: CRE exposure and the prospect of significant price declines, 
especially in downtown office space; interest rate risk and the prospect of cont inued rising 
rates; depositor behavior in the face of rising rates; and the possibility of a recession. The 
actual scenario addressed the first and the last of these  risks24 but neglected interest rate 
risk and funding risk through adverse depositor behavior.  
In this section , we make several suggestions on how to improve the supervisory stress -
testing regime to address these types of deficiencies.  
More Stress Scenarios 
For a complex banking system with an ecosystem of banks covering a wide range of banking 
and financial intermediation activities, and just a few universal banks, designing a single 
scenario to capture the range of key risks and vulnerabilities is impossible. More scenarios 
are needed, and indeed the largest banks make use of a multitud e of scenarios for their 
internal stress testing and risk management, recognizing that exposure to different 
customers, markets, geographies through a range of products and services results in a 
complex risk profile. Whatever risk complexity is faced by an  individual bank is multiplied 
when considering the supervisor’s problem of designing a scenario for a banking system. 
More scenarios would help the Federal Reserve evaluate the capacity of banks to absorb 
losses associated with adversity on the horizon, and adversity can come in a variety of forms, 
including economic, geopolitical, and other nonfinancial shocks , such as a coordinated 
cyberattack. At a minimum, the scenarios need to probe on the key risks and vulnerabilities 
that arise naturally from the bu siness of banking: credit risk, which is largely covered with 
the canonical severe recession, flight to quality, and a rates-down scenario; interest rate risk, 
which requires a rates -up scenario and is thus not covered in the canonical scenario; and 
liquidity risk, which is not covered at all since these stress tests are largely capital oriented, 
even though liquidity vulnerabilities can be exposed in a broad range of stress scenarios, 
whether stresses to credit triggering a flight to quality , a decline in rates, or an inflation 
scenario triggering a rise in rates. 
It is worth noting that the Federal Reserve is moving in this direction. DFAST-2023 included 
an additional exploratory market shock scenario targeted at large banks with significant 
capital markets operations, and DFAST -2024 expanded the use of exploratory scenarios to 
the full set of banks via the nine-quarter scenario (Fed 2024b). However, the results of those 
 
24 Clearly, a recession would result in losses to CRE (and other) lending, which is why a severe recession forms 
the basis of all DFAST scenarios. 
32
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 16 ---
exploratory scenarios do not impact capital requirements set by the tests and are discl osed 
only at an aggregate level, failing to provide valuable  information about individual bank 
resilience.25 Since 2017, the Bank of England has employed a similar approach, conducting a 
“biennial exploratory scenario ” that is designed to focus on emerging risks that are less 
emphasized in the annual solvency-focused test, providing insights into vulnerabilities that 
could be used to inform supervisory actions. 
With several scenario results in hand, the question of how to link them to capital 
requirements, such as via the stress capital buffer (SCB), arises. Every regulatory capital 
regime needs to manage risk sensitivity against capital requirement volatility. 26 Since risks 
change continuously as asset prices, interest rates, and information about r eal economic 
activity change, a highly risk-sensitive capital regime would result in correspondingly highly 
volatile capital requirements, which presents significant challenges to bank management.27  
On the other hand, static capital requirements that do n ot reflect how capital buffers are 
likely to be depleted, at least on an economic basis, in the face of increased risk like interest 
rate or credit is similarly undesirable. Our recommendation is to take the average of the top 
two scenario impacts for a gi ven bank.28 Note that here we mean “top two” scenarios that 
cause the institution to experience the greatest capital losses, and the way we conceive of 
this ranking allows for heterogeneity across institutions, as they will be bound by the 
scenarios that r eflect the greatest risks to their unique  business mix. We think this would 
provide an appropriate balance between risk sensitivity and stress capital volatility via, for 
instance, the SCB.29 
More Comprehensive Use of Fair Valuation 
Since SVB failed, there  has been a host of work on the impact of rising rates on bank 
portfolios, with market participants and academics running quasi -stress tests of their own 
to judge how much capital has been wiped out by mark -to-market losses in the securities 
 
25 Perhaps an initial attempt in this direction would be DFAST -2020 when the Federal Reserve, in light o f the 
COVID-19 pandemic , which started after the scenario was released, conducted three last -minute sensitivity 
analyses against the single stress scenario to reflect the tremendous uncertainty facing the economy at the time. 
Only aggregate (so no bank -level) sensitivity results were disclosed. For a discussion about  this decision and 
the “asymmetric transparency” of the tests, with the Federal Reserve releasing bank -level data only for tests 
that had been designed and largely conducted before the pandemic began, see Tarullo (2020). 
26 Indeed, the current regime with only one scenario suffers from this potential high SCB volatility. The only 
way to mitigate that effect is to keep the scenario relatively consistent from year to year, as has become the 
norm. In that way, the SCB may well have become less risk sensitive.  
27 Quarles (2019) argues for transparency in stress testing to facilitate firms’ being able to plan for their capital 
needs with “the benefit of the results of our tests ” and calls for an approach to the tests that would “mean no 
single year could have an outsized influence on the amount of capital that a bank is required to maintain. ” 
28 One challenge with this recommendation is how the market might interpret the more severe of the two 
scenarios. Should the bank be held to the higher of the two rather than the average? We view this as a feature, 
not a bug , of our recommendation as it promotes market discipline through healthy inquisition by market 
participants into the stress test results and any other risk-relevant information about the bank. 
29 An alternative or additional smoothing could be to average across years. Indeed, the Fed recently proposed 
a two-year smoothing of single-scenario results as a possibility; see Fed 2024c. 
33
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
portfolio. Depending on one ’s calculation of the value of the deposit franchise, as interest 
rates rose, banks lost somewhere between 30% to 100% of total capital in the months 
following SVB’s failure,30 and yet bank dividends and stock repurchases continued apace.  
The current stress test regime forces banks to reflect credit, market , and operational risk 
losses in post-stress capital requirements. For securities, credit losses are recorded via OTTI 
(other than temporary impairment);31 for loans, this happens through credit provisions.  
Interest rate risk is not reflected in the stress test for securities that banks categorize as those 
planned to be HTM. 32 The absence of mark -to-(stress) market for the large securities 
portfolios of larger banks should be addressed. 33 Removing the accumulated other 
comprehensive income ( AOCI) filter for all but the smallest banks will be a big step in the 
right direction, as it will require fair value losses on AFS securities to flow through to equity 
capital generally. But that increase in transparency might be offset by a decrease in 
transparency if banks respond to an increased incentive to reclassify securities as HTM to 
avoid volatility in their capital requirements.34 
The fair value of HTM securities is already disclosed on a current  (spot) basis; they appear 
in quarterly regulatory filings. 35 But their mark -to-stress, if and when calculated, is not 
disclosed. While arriving at an adjusted -TCE requirement is a difficult challenge that may 
well introduce more complexity —rather than transparency —into regulatory assessments 
 
30 Mark-to-market losses in banks’ assets following the interest rate increases from Q1 2022 to Q1 2023  were 
computed by Jiang et al. (2024), marking an average decline of 10%, totaling $2 trillion in aggregate.  
31 “Consistent with U.S. GAAP, OTTI projections in corporate other-than-temporary differences between book 
value and fair value due to credit impairment but generally do not incorporate differences reflecting changes 
in liquidity or market conditions” (Fed 2018).  
32 For loans, interest rate risk is reflect ed, but only partially. Specifically, in the canonical recessionary stress 
scenario, credit risk increases owing to economic fundamentals ( for example, unemployment goes up) but is 
somewhat mitigated by a reduction in interest rates, which, however, makes prepayment more likely for loans 
that allow for early payment, for example,  most residential mortgages. In an inflationary environment, the 
effect goes in the other direction. Moreover, in the latter scenario with rising rates, the opportunity cost of a 
fixed loan’s not adjusting to the prevailing rate environment is not accounted for.  
33 Only the very largest banks (Categor ies I and II) are required to account for the impact of fair valuation 
changes in their AFS securities portfolio, captured through accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI). 
This regulatory loophole available to all but the very largest banks should be closed —except, perhaps, for 
community banks, which we define as <$10 billion in total assets, the threshold below which banks qualify for 
the Community Bank Leverage Ratio Framework. The recent Basel III Endgame proposal takes a step in this 
direction by requiring the Category III and Category IV banks to account for the impact of fair valuation changes 
as well, but for a narrower category of banks (those above $100 billion in assets).  
34 It has been noted that this practice leads to a less transparent view of unrealized losses on a bank’s securities 
portfolio. Silicon Valley Bank , for example, was able to hide unrealized losses for multiple quarters until a 
massive run by its uninsured depositors forced liquidation of these securities ; see Granja (2023) . See also 
Fuster and Vickery (2018), which shows there is ample empirical evidence that banks take advantage of 
opportunities to save on capital charges by “actively reshuffling their portfolios, and in particular classifying 
risky securities as “held to maturity” [HTM] rather than available for sale [AFS].” 
35 Simply disclosing the information may not be enough. Beatty and Liao (2014) cites research that documents 
a negative market reaction to the adoption of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 115 in late 1993, 
which required banks to recognize fair values of investment securities previously disclosed only in footnotes. 
34
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 18 ---
of financial stability,  simply disclosing such marks would provide transparency to the 
market, an important goal of stress testing more broadly. We suggest disclosing tangible 
common equity, adjusted for marking  to stress, so that the market is able to compare it to 
spot adjusted TCE. Investors already gravitate to using TCE as a measure of bank health in 
times of stress precisely because regulatory metrics fail to capture marks in the HTM book.36 
It is worth emphasizing that marking all securities to stress would result in a ben efit in the 
canonical severe recession scenario, which is accompanied by a flight to quality and decline 
in interest rates, that is, decline in rates for credit-risk-free securities like US Treasuries. This 
effect would offset some of the adverse impact of  credit losses from loans and credit -risky 
securities. Of course, in a rates -up scenario, as we have been facing since 2022, marking to 
stress would result in a decline in value.  
Including disclosure of mark-to-stress would, over time and across scenarios, build a history 
of capital impact when more fully accounting for interest rate risk. 37, 38 Market participants 
and supervisors could then form a view on minimum TCE that adjusts for all unrealized 
stress losses on a bank ’s holding of securities. This would paint a more dynamic picture of 
bank capital and ensure financial institutions remain well -capitalized even if HTM losses 
need to be realized to fund outflows in moments of extreme stress. 39 The value of this 
proposal relies on the e xistence of multiple scenarios that appropriate stress interest rate 
risk, to allow for comparison of how stress -adjusted TCE is likely to evolve in different 
interest rate environments. Without more fundamental regulatory changes (new notice-and-
comment rulemaking), it would not be possible to tie stress capital requirements to stress 
TCE. But establishing a history of stress TCEs would be valuable input into any future 
calibration of minimum adjusted TCE requirements, should regulation move in that 
direction. 
Shifting toward incorporating fair values in our capital regime would be meaningful to both 
banks’ performance at baseline and their performance throughout various stress scenarios. 
At baseline, regulatory and fair -valued capital ratios paint potentia lly divergent pictures of 
 
36 Of course, supervisors could also incorporate this information into the supervisory exam process and thus 
exert pressure to increase (or at least husband) capital. 
37 We are not advocating for full fair valuation of the loan book. The current approach we believe sufficiently 
captures the most salient vulnerabilities. Moreover, securities, whether held to maturity or available for sale 
or for trading, can be readily marked to market, precisely because they are securities. That is not the case for 
the vast majority of loans. 
38 Early runs of this new disclosure regime would run the risk of providing estimates of stress -adjusted TCE 
across scenarios w ithout the benefit of historical context to help interpret their meaning. One way for the 
Federal Reserve to navigate this lack of clarity would be to publish historical estimates alongside the first 
DFAST disclosures.  
39 Critics of this broader applicability of fair valuing of all securities point to the asymmetric treatment between 
assets and liabilities. In a rising -rate environment, the debt securities issued by the bank also decline in value 
(to the creditor, not to the bank!) and will at least partially offset the value decline in the securities held on the 
asset side of the balance sheet. However, in stressful states of the world, markets will ignore the gain on the 
right, which partially makes up for the loss on the left side of the balance sheet, su pporting an asymmetric 
treatment for purposes of stress testing. There is a corresponding positive effect for the bank with deposits, an 
issue we pick up in the section More Explicit Stress Testing of Bank Funding. 
35
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 19 ---
bank stability. 40 And even just with the existing severely adverse stress scenario (which 
includes a 45% to 50% decline in the equity market), one would see much larger swings in 
more market-based relative to regulatory capital measures.  
To be sure, we are not advocating for balance sheet –wide fair valuation. Regulators do not 
require banks to hold enough capital to withstand marking  to market the entire balance 
sheet while still meeting regulatory capital minimums, and that is by  design: Accrual 
accounting plays an important role in allowing banks to perform their maturity and liquidity 
transformation function. 41 Our recommendation is limited to the securities portfolio, and 
only under the stress scenario(s). 
The standard argument against including interest rate risk in the stress valuations of HTM 
securities and loans is that those securities/loans will be paid back with stress credit risk - 
adjusted probabilities. At default, bond and loan recovery values will, of course, be 
influenced by the prevailing rate of interest, and in this way, interest rate risk will be 
incorporated for defaulted bonds and loans. If the bonds are US Treasuries or similar, and 
thus without credit risk, they will be paid back at par upon maturing. 
Bond issuers and borrowers that have a prepayment option would exercise them only in a 
falling-rate environment, and that risk is accounted for in the stress test. But investors who 
look at the whole balance sheet of the bank recognize that stable funding is requi red for a 
bank to comfortably ride out the below-fair-value cash flows (reducing net interest income) 
in a rising-rate environment. As securities and loans with low interest rates roll off and are 
replaced with higher-interest-earning ones, this problem attenuates.  
But if there is not enough stable funding, investors have an incentive to walk, and then run, 
as was the case for some financial institutions in the spring of 2023. This argues in favor of a 
formal interest rate risk capital charge within the stress-testing regime that allows for 
adjusting bank capital levels for the possibility that financial institutions may find 
themselves without the luxury of waiting out significant point-in-time interest rate losses.42 
More Explicit Stress Testing of Bank Funding 
It is worth noting that banks ’ liabilities increase in (fair) value when rates rise, at the same 
time as HTM losses accumulate, offsetting some of the asset value erosion. That hedge 
against interest rate rises is ostensibly the deposit franchise value of a bank since banks earn 
the spread between the consistently low rates they pay on short -term liabilities and the 
 
40 It has been noted that market measures prove to be more dynamic than regulatory capital ratios ; see Sarin 
and Summers (2016). This is further illustrated in the lead-up to the financial crisis, in which regulatory capital 
ratios were static, whereas market-based capital ratios reflected cause for concern. 
41 See Beatty and Liao (2014) for an extensive discussion covering the challenges of bank accounting.  
42 The failure to consider interest rate risk meaningfully is broader than its omission from the stress tests. And 
it is a uniquely American deficiency: inclusion of interest rate risk for regulatory capital purposes already exists 
in Basel II and III; the US has just decided not to adopt it for its regulatory capital regime, which we believe is a 
misstep. 
36
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 20 ---
higher interest rates. 43 Moreover, this “natural” hedge is often used as an argument for not 
needing to purchase “synthetic” hedges in the form of interest rate derivatives. Deposits are 
sticky in the face of rising rates. This deposit sensitivity to interest rates is referred to as a 
deposit beta that is less than 1 (on average, it is between 0.3 and 0.4, though for large well -
capitalized banks , it closer to 0).44 But, deposits may not be as sticky as banks hope in 
stressful conditions , which illustrates the importance of including funding risk more 
comprehensively in stress tests.45 
Stable funding has two impacts that the regulatory reg ime should consider: First, increases 
in the value of the deposit franchise offset losses in the fair value of bank assets. Second, to 
the extent fair value is depleted, a large share of stable funding buys time for banks to earn 
their way out of interest rate losses. But the converse is also true: a low share of stable 
funding is a vulnerability that amplifies risks on the asset side of banks’ balance sheets. This 
fact should be incorporated into stress tests.  
In practice, deposit flight is a significant vulnerability, and we do not have a good grasp on 
how deposit betas evolve in stressful conditions. This is crucial to understanding flight 
dynamics as well as the value of banks ’ deposit franchise s: if the value of the deposit 
franchise is not a complete hedge against interest rate risk or becomes less of a hedge in 
moments of stress, then the erosion in capital precipitated by interest rate losses requires more 
aggressive and immediate action. 
What distinguished some of the recent bank failures was their unusually high share of 
uninsured deposits. Itamar Drechsler, Alexi Savov, Philipp Schnabl, and Olivier Wang (2024) 
present a model that shows the value of the deposit franchise is decreasing in the share of 
uninsured deposits.46 Indeed, as that share grows, the bank becomes more run -prone, but 
only in a rising-rate environment.47  
 
43 It has been highlighted how a bank’s deposit franchise acts as a hedge against rising rates and helps the bank 
to manage interest rate risk; see Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2021). Indeed, this argument helps to explain 
a somewhat puzzling stylized fact that net interest income is relativ ely insensitive to interest rates. 
44 A deposit beta of 0.35 means that a bank raises deposit rates 35 basis points  (bps) for a 100-bp increase in 
short-term interest rates.  “The average expense and income betas are 0.345 and 0.351, respectively, with 
substantial variation in the range of 0.1 to 0.6” (Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl 2021).  
45 Indeed, deposit betas do go up as the interest rate tightening cycle matures. See  Kang-Landsberg, Luck, and 
Plosser (2023), which shows that deposit betas tend to rise ov er the course of the tightening cycle, peaking at 
about 0.4 to 0.5 for total deposits and 0.7 for interest-bearing deposits. The authors note that deposit betas for 
interest-bearing accounts have been going up especially quickly in this cycle to about 0.4 by the end of 2022. 
See also Emin, James, and Li (2024), which reports similar deposit beta convexity to interest rates, finding that 
deposit betas tend to be lower in low -rate environments (a federal funds rate below 2 %). See also Luck and 
Plosser (2024), which finds that regional banks, which the authors define as $50 billion to $250 billion in total 
assets, have seen the steepest increases in deposit betas following the demise of SVB in March 2023.  
46 It has been shown that bank ’s liquidity risks increases as interest rates rise. Specifically, “[w]hen interest 
rates are low, the value of the deposit franchise is small relative to the value of the bank ’s asserts . . . But when 
interest rates rise and the deposit franchise comes to dominate the value  of the bank, a run equilibrium 
emerges” (Drechsler et al. 2024). 
47 See also Jiang et al. (2024) for an extreme estimate of the impact of rising rates on mark -to-market losses at 
financial institutions but ignoring the offsetting impact on banks ’ deposit franchises.  
37
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 21 ---
Large and thus uninsured deposits need not be unstable. There are so -called operational 
deposits that are necessary for institutional clients to continue their operations. The deposits 
are effectively by-products of the underlying services provided by the bank and not sought 
out in the wholesale market in the sole interest of offering interest income. Examples would 
include clearing, custody, and cash management activities such as payroll. Recognizing this 
important feature, the LCR treats such deposits more favorably than other uninsured 
deposits.48  
The increased importance of digital banking and social media today serve as accelerants to 
failure when funding is not stable.49 New reporting on deposit concentrations, together with 
already available information about the share of uninsured deposits, would allow the Federal 
Reserve to build stress test models to estimate the propensity for deposit flight as a function 
of these factors (deposit concentration, share of unstable deposits, 50 recently updated 
deposit betas, and other risk -relevant bank characteristics) for a set of interest rate 
scenarios. Further, deposit betas will be a useful parameter for exp loring the sensitivity of 
banks’ liquidity vulnerability to rises in interest rates. Specifically, imposing a late-cycle beta 
of 0.7 or higher for unstable deposits  as a stress parameter would be a plausible and easily 
implementable component of a stress test (Kang-Landsberg, Luck, and Zingales 2023). 
It is worth noting that the DFAST -2024 exercise added two exploratory funding scenarios 
where 20% of non-interest-bearing deposits are assumed to shift into time deposits, similar 
to the deposit shift experienced in March 2023, resulting in banks ’ increasing their reliance 
on wholesale funding and paying market rates on a larger share of their liabilities (effectively 
imposing a near -1 beta for those deposits). The funding stress analyses are intended to be 
conducted against the backdrop of both moderate and severe global recession scenarios 
accompanied by rising inflation 51. The exploratory scenarios are structured to be probing 
but not binding, in that their results are not used to calculate capital requirements.  
More Banks Should be Stress Tested Every Year 
With the 2019 tailoring rule, the Federal Reserve introduced a taxonomy of classifying banks 
with more than $50 billion in total assets into five categories and tailoring the requirements 
on capital, liquidity, and stress testing accordingly. Roughly speaking, Category I banks are 
the US global systemically important banks ( GSIBs); Category II banks have between $250 
billion and $700 billion in total assets or ≥  $75 billion in cross -jurisdictional activity; 
Category III banks have between $250 billion and $700 billion in total assets or at least $75 
billion in nonbank assets, weighted short -term wholesale funding , or off -balance-sheet 
 
48 Former Acting Comptroller Hsu has called for a standardization in deposit classification to remove ambiguity 
about what constitutes an operational deposit (Hsu 2024). 
49 It has been reported that banks with mobile banking and brokerage services experience faster deposit flows 
and greater increases in the cost of deposits in response to interest rate increases ; see Koont , Santos, and 
Zingales (2024). This is logical: when transaction costs decrease, attentive depositors are less willing to accept 
low interest rates as opposed to redirecting deposits into more profitable alternatives.  
50 We use the term “unstable deposits” to allow for the inclusion of operational deposits. 
51 “The second set of macroeconomic conditions features a severe global  recession combined with high and 
persistent inflation and rising interest rates” (Fed2024a). 
38
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 22 ---
exposure; Category IV banks are other banks betwee n $100 billion and $250 billion in total 
assets.52 
Only Category I, II, and III banks are subject to the supervisory stress tests annually; Category 
IV banks are subject only “periodically”—which at present means biannual stress testing. 53 
Banks should, an d do, run company stress tests using their own stress scenario , which is 
supposed to be tailored to their own risks—but of a severity that is commensurate with the 
supervisory scenario. Only Category I and II banks are required to run these company stress 
tests annually. Category III banks need do so only every other year, and Category IV banks 
are exempt entirely.54 
We believe more banks should be subject to supervisory and company -run stress tests 
annually. The company-designed stress test is a critical risk management exercise as it forces 
a bank to confront and identify its risks and vulnerabilities and design a scenario to explore 
their resiliency. Only the smallest banks, such as community banks, should continue to be 
exempt. 
Category I–IV banks should  be stressed at least annually, alongside regional banks above 
some asset threshold. The ideal threshold would capture the universe of banks whose 
potential failure would be significant enough to cause regulators to contemplate the systemic 
risk exception, although this is hard to pinpoint concretely ex ante.  
Stress testing is not costless. For banks, the burden comes in the form of extensive and 
detailed data submissions, which are likely to be disproportionately costly for smaller 
institutions that are not as technologically sophisticated and do not have the infrastructure 
internally to easily transition to greater data -sharing with regulators. 55 For the Fed , there 
would be the burden of stress testing more than 100 additional banks. Both of these burdens 
could be lessened by simplifying the data submissions and therefore also the modeling 
efforts. Our view is that regular but simpler stress testing is preferred to no stress testing.56  
Should We Decouple Bank Capital Requirements from the Stress Test? Som e 
Considerations 
Following the GFC, stress tests have evolved to be the cornerstone of the financial regulatory 
regime. They essentially govern the capital that large financial institutions are required to 
hold to bolster themselves against potential losses. The stress tes ts have been widely 
 
52 Foreign banking organizations between $50 billion and $100 billion are subject to some single-counterparty 
credit limits. 
53 Category IV banks always have the option of participating in the off-cycle DFAST. 
54 All banks $100 billion and above do need to submit a capital plan every year, and those usually do contain 
stress testing. 
55 Specifically, the FR Y-14 data templates, which are quite extensive.  
56 Note that banks at more than $10 billion are expected to do some stress testing. See Fed (2012). 
39
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 23 ---
celebrated by regulators for facilitating a dynamic regulatory regime that can be responsive 
to emerging crises: a tool for fire prevention rather than inevitable post-crisis firefighting.57  
But, as we have shown, the stress tests are failing to deliver the dynamism that they were 
cheered for. The have drifted toward becoming rote compliance exercises rather than 
forward-looking assessments of how well-equipped large financial institutions are to handle 
distress that may be on the horizon.  
As this paper makes clear, we do not believe it is appropriate to abandon the stress tests. A 
host of changes would help the tests create a much more dynamic financial regulatory 
regime. But there are also many reasons to be skeptical that those refor ms are attainable in 
the current moment, which raises the question of what comes next.  
Reasons for Skepticism: Legal Challenges to Stress Tests 
The Federal Reserve has long been criticized for its existing approach to stress testing, which 
banks (and indu stry groups) argue should be subject to the notice -and-comment 
requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). While these critiques have ebbed 
over time as the stress tests have become less stressful, in July 2023 —in anticipation of 
possible refor ms to the tests —the Bank Policy Institute (BPI) and the American Bankers 
Association (ABA) renewed their calls for greater public engagement in the annual stress 
tests through public comment on stress scenarios and models.58  
The industry’s claim is that b ecause the stress test results are important inputs into large 
bank capital requirements, the models and scenarios that govern the tests should, each year, 
be subject to notice -and-comment rulemaking. Specifically, because the models and 
scenarios set “rules” in the form of future -oriented capital requirements, they should be 
subject to the notice-and-comment requirement.  
Even more recently, in December 2024, BPI and the ABA teamed up with the Ohio Chamber 
of Commerce, the Ohio Bankers League, and the Cham ber of Commerce to file a lawsuit 
against the Federal Reserve in Ohio, formalizing these arguments to claim that the agency 
had reached beyond its statutory mandate.59 
In earlier work, Dan Tarullo has offered two rejoinders to calls for notice -and-comment.60 
The first is that the tests do not constitute a “final agency action”; for example, following the 
tests, the Federal Reserve offers banks an opportunity to contest its determinations. The 
second is that even if we assume that the model and scenarios are rules that would otherwise 
be subject to notice-and-comment, this situation would merit the Administrative Procedure 
 
57 See Hirtle (2018), which points out the limitations of the stress test s while cheering their ability to help 
regulators spot crises before they occur. 
58 Oblack (2023) calls on the Federal Reserve to “remedy the serious legal defects ” that currently undermine 
the stress tests. 
59 See Bank Policy Institute v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024).  
60 See Tarullo (2022) for an engagement with the complex relationship between the scriptures of  
administrative law and the bank regulatory regime, which demands dynamism.  
40
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 24 ---
Act’s good cause exemption, as formal rulemaking would be contrary to the public’s interest 
in the Federal Reserve ’s arriving at a dynamic  and unbiased assessment of bank health in 
hypothetical moments of distress. Another boost to preserving the no-rulemaking status quo 
is the existence of other statutory provisions (outside the stress-testing context) that provide 
the Federal Reserve significant discretion in setting capital requirements.61 
If notice-and-comment is adopted, that will make the kind of dynamic responses to real-time 
economic risks that we contemplate impossible to achieve. 62 Even if it is not, the Federal 
Reserve’s understand able risk aversion in the face of potential legal challenges may push 
against the type of novel and dynamic changes to stress testing that we recommend. 
Decoupling Stress Tests from Capital Requirements Has Some Benefits but Costs That 
Outweigh Them  
One way to manage legal and policy risk could be to decouple minimum capital requirements 
from the results of the tests explicitly, and instead allow the tests to be an input into the 
bank-specific supervisory process. That is the approach followed by other jurisdictions: For 
example, the E uropean Union, U nited Kingdom, and Switzerland use the outcomes of the 
stress test exercise as an input to increasing capital levels via the so -called Pillar 2 G (G for 
guidance), which is at the discretion of the supervisor.  
Following the European example would have some real virtues.  It could allow for more 
innovative approaches to stressing banks against emerging risks, and these new methods 
would be lower stakes (and less likely to be legally challenged) if they are but an input in the 
supervisory process, as opposed to a be-all-and-end-all tool to set capital requirements.  
But our current approach has its own virtues. A direct link between stress tests results and 
capital requirements is not dependent on supervisory judgment. Thus , supervisors are not 
tempted to mute the capital impact or delay any implied increase in capital required or offer 
regulatory forbearance at the outset of crises because of a concern that affirmative action 
(for example, forcing new capital to be raised) would be destabilizing. Our direct approach 
also has the virtue of clarity: With the quantitative stress test results in hand, it is clear how 
they translate to capital requirements. And because the stakes are high, our approach means 
that regulators—and banks—take the stress-testing exercise seriously.  
 
61 See Int’l Lending Supervision Act (1983); and Dodd-Frank (2010).  
The former explicitly permits the Federal Reserve to establish minimum capital levels for banks “by using such 
other methods as the appropriate  . . . [banking agency] deems appropriate. ” The latter allows the Federal 
Reserve to set more stringent prudential standards based on its assessment of “the risk posed by banks to 
financial stability, safety, and soundness.” As Tarullo (2022) argues, the stress tests and their associated capital 
requirements can easily be understood as “an exercise of the essentially unreviewable discretion ” granted to 
the Federal Reserve by these statutory provisions that govern banking law more generally, outside the specific 
stress testing context.  
62 Between the comment period following release of a proposed scenario, digesting, responding to , and then 
accounting for comments in the final scenario, this process would take at least six months, likely closer to one 
year, to unfold. By that time, the risks that are supposed to be tested for will have either manifested or morphed.  
41
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 25 ---
Further, without a formal linkage between stress tests and bank capital requirements, the 
tests would become but another input into the supervisory toolkit. A changing risk profile 
coupled with severe but plausible threats on the horizon might well expose a capital 
shortfall, and it is hard to imagine that these inputs —no matter how glaring —would lead 
supervisors to stop capital disbursements or force banks into painful capital raising, as the 
current stress tests can do, automatically.  
Indeed, during the GFC, regulators were reluctant to use their authority and the information 
gleaned about the capital position s of large financial institutions to force recapitalization 
until the crisis was well underway. This is in part because the affirmative decision to fo rce 
new capital raises, in and of itself, may have exacerbated the crisis rather than prevented 
it—because it would have been interpreted by the market as a sign of the deep troubles 
facing the financial sector. More generally, we agree with former Vice Chair Tarullo that there 
is a danger in relying too heavily on supervisory discretion, and there is value in clear and 
automated rules that flow from the current stress test capital requirements because they 
free supervisors from the need to interpret complex data in light of changing circumstances 
and act affirmatively in ways that may risk destabilizing the financial system.  
The industry has also called for more transparency and disclosure of supervisory stress -
testing models. All regulatory capital regime s are subject to model risk as they are a model 
or set of models about the relative riskiness of different assets and banking activities. This is 
perhaps especially true for a stress test –based regime where models determine both the 
scenario and the mappin g of the scenario to outcomes which, in turn, determine needed 
capital levels. When that determination is directly coupled to actual capital requirements, 
exposure to model risk rises.  
The Fed is quite aware of this risk. First, it has implemented a formal model risk management 
program including independent model validation. This program is supported by a Model 
Validation Council, a group of academic experts not affiliated with the Federal Reserve that 
provides advice on the validation program and activiti es.63 Second, the Fed has  provided 
significant disclosure about the mapping models, including functional form and variables 
used.64 In any event, banks have largely been able to back -out supervisory models already, 
since they have seen repeat draws against  essentially the same scenario over the course of 
more than a decade.65 While there is likely more to be done to decrease exposure to model 
risk, disclosing models or decoupling the stress tests from capital requirements in the name 
of risk reduction does more harm than good.  
How then to best couple stress test outcomes to regulatory capital requirements is an area 
where we acknowledge that there is no first -best solution, and thoughtful commentators 
may come out on different sides of the argument. Even we are unsure of how best to manage 
 
63 Fed (2018).  
64 Fed (2019a). 
65 See Glasserman and Tangirala (2015) for a discussion of the small number of scenarios employed by the 
Federal Reserve. The authors compare stress test perfor mance across years and across institutions and find a 
strikingly linear relationship demonstrating the consistent loss rate projections year after year, suggesting that 
stress tests have become more and more predictable over time.  
42
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 26 ---
the competing risks associated with supervisory discretion and a failure to reform the status-
quo stress tests , which today are failing to deliver a dynamic picture of financial stability. 
One cause for optimism is the shi ft in the direction of more exploratory scenarios that seek 
to learn about emerging threats to large financial institutions.  
Should the legal and political environment evolve such that the reforms we recommend are 
outside the Overton window for regulators , then decoupling stress testing from capital 
requirements, as a way to facilitate the wholesale reform we recommend, may well be a 
second-best approach worth considering. It would ensure that the regulatory regime would 
have the information it needs to ac t at the outset of the next financial panic. And disclosing 
the results across a range of scenarios would still allow for market discipline, however 
imperfect.  
But it is our view that we are not there yet, and that the costs associated—both to the stress-
testing infrastructure and to the increased reliance on supervisory discretion that may not 
be well  exercised, particularly in times of crisis —outweigh the benefits associated with 
making such a change today. 
IV. Conclusions 
The banking system is subject to regular stress tests aimed at directing vulnerabilities in the 
financial sector before they balloon into contagious financial crises. The introduction of 
regular stress testing is the most important post-crisis financial reform, and the stress tests 
sit at t he center of the financial regulatory regime today. While they are an important 
regulatory tool, there is scope for reform to help ensure that they provide a comprehensive, 
forward-looking, and dynamic assessment of financial stability. Specifically, the u se of a 
single, nearly identical stress scenario, year in and year out, does not reflect regulators’ best 
attempts to gauge emerging risks. 
Our proposals are four-fold: First, banks should be subject to more stress scenarios to allow 
for more bites of the apple concerning identifying latent risks. Second, the stress tests should 
come to conclusions about bank capital positions based on market measures that reflect 
changes in valuation of their securities portfolio s under stress, rather than static book 
measures. Third, stress tests should account for more hitherto untested risks, particularly 
interest rate and funding risks associated with reliance on runnable liabilities. Fourth, the 
universe of banks subject to st ress tests should be expanded and  the tests  conducted 
annually for all banks, as even midsize and regional bank failures are potentially systemically 
destabilizing. While these reforms must be complemented by a broader suite of regulatory 
and supervisory changes, improving the stress tests as we describe is critical to improving 
the resilience of the banking system.  
The changes that we describe range in their difficulty of implementation. Simply including 
more exploratory scenarios in regularized stress te sts could be done absent legislative 
changes. However, tying capital requirements to these other scenarios and expanding the 
stress tests to a broader swath of financial institutions would require legislative action. For 
43
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 27 ---
this paper, we have focused on changes that would facilitate more dynamic and informative 
stress tests, leaving for future work the best path to achieving these reforms. 
It would be errant to view the changes that we propose to stress testing in a vacuum. In order 
to address the underlying causes of the instability of the financial sector, it will be important 
to think holistically about changes to both liquidity and capital regulation that can preempt 
both solvency crises —by ensuring that banks are adequately capitalized and have 
contingencies in place in case they are not when faced with very large, unexpected losses —
and contagion, by helping to ensure that financial institutions have access to liquidity so runs 
do not accelerate and become destabilizing to the financial system. Our proposed changes to 
stress testing will be an important tool for the former. Contemplating the right set of reforms 
to the lender -of-last-resort function and further run -proofing the system through more 
broad-based deposit insurance or changes like the pre -positioning of collateral that push 
against overreliance on inherently unstable funding sources are important areas for future 
work.66 
  
 
66 Some of this important work has already begun. See Hanson et al.  (2024), calling for tougher liquidity 
regulations to ensure that banks have sufficient funds available when depositors are at risk of running. For a 
different reform proposal, see also Menand and Ricks (2023), arguing for universal deposit insurance, fully paid 
for through risk-based deposit insurance assessments that would continue to accrue even if the FDIC insurance 
fund were fully funded.  
44
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 28 ---
V. References 
Bank Policy Institute v. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2024. 
“Complaint.” U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio, Eastern Division, No. 2:24-
cv-04300, December 24, 2024. https://bpi.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/12/BPI-
OHChamber-OHBankers-ABA-Chamber-Stress-Testing-Complaint-2024.12.24.pdf 
Barr, Michael S. 2023. “Multiple Scenarios in Stress Testing.” Speech given at the Stress Test 
Research Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA, 
October 19, 2023. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/barr20231019a.htm  
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). 2023. “Report on the 2023 Banking 
Turmoil.” Bank for International Settlements, October 2023.  
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d555.pdf  
Beatty, Anne, and Scott Liao. 2014. “Financial Accounting in the Banking Industry: A Review 
of the Empirical Literature.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 58 nos. 2–3): 339–83. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacceco.2014.08.009 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed). 2012. “Supervisory Guidance on 
Stress Testing for Banking Organizations with More Than $10 Billion in Total Consolidated 
Assets, May 2012.”  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/sr1207.htm  
———. 2018. “Supervisory Stress Test Framework and Model Methodology.” Dodd-Frank 
Act Stress Test 2018: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology and Results, June 2018”.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2018-june-dodd-frank-act-stress-test-
supervisory-stress-test-framework-and-model-methodology.htm 
———. 2019a. “Federal Reserve Board Releases Document Providing Additional 
Information on Its Stress Testing Program.” Press release, March 28, 2019.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20190328a.htm  
———. 2024a. “2024 Stress Test Scenarios.” February 2024.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2024-stress-test-scenarios-
20240215.pdf 
———. 2024b. “Exploratory Analysis of Risks to the Banking System: Summary of Analysis 
Parameters.” February 2024. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/exploratory-analysis-of-risks-to-the-
banking-system-20240215.pdf  
———. 2024c. “Due to Evolving Legal Landscape & Changes in the Framework of 
Administrative Law, Federal Reserve Board Will Soon Seek Public Comment on Significant 
Changes to Improve Transparency of Bank Stress Tests & Reduce Volatility of Resulting 
45
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 29 ---
Capital Requirements.” Press release, December 23, 2024.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20241223a.htm  
———. 2025a. “Dodd-Frank Act Stress Tests 2024.” June 27, 2025. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/dfa-stress-tests-2024.htm  
Cheng, Jeffrey, and David Wessel. 2018. “Ten Years after the Financial Crisis: Reflections by 
Bernanke, Geithner and Paulson.” Commentary delivered at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal & 
Monetary Policy at Brookings”, Washington, DC, September 19, 2018. 
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/reflections-by-bernanke-geithner-and-paulson/ 
Cox, Christopher. 2008. “Testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, 
and Urban Affairs Concerning Recent Events in the Credit Markets.” U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission, April 3, 2008. 
https://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/2008/ts040308cc.htm 
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank). 2010. 
“Enhanced prudential standards.” 12 U.S.C. §5365(a)(1)(A). 
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/12/5365 
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2021. “Banking on Deposits: Maturity 
Transformation without Interest Rate Risk.” Journal of Finance 76, no. 3: 1091–143. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.13013 
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, Philipp Schnabl, and Olivier Wang. 2024. “Banking on 
Uninsured Deposits.” NBER Working Paper No. 31138, September 2024. 
https://www.nber.org/papers/w31138  
Emin, Mustafa, Christopher M. James, and Tao Li. 2024. “Variable Deposit Betas and Bank 
Exposure to Interest Rate Risk.” SSRN Electronic Journal, November 25, 2024.  
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4598126  
Fuster, Andreas, and James Vickery. 2018. “Regulation and Risk Shuffling in Bank Securities 
Portfolios.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 851, June 2018.  
https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr851  
Glasserman, Paul, and Gowtham Tangirala. 2015. “Are the Federal Reserve’s Stress Test 
Results Predictable?” Office of Financial Research Working Paper No. 15-02, March 3, 2015.  
https://www.financialresearch.gov/working-papers/files/OFRwp-2015-02-Are-the-
Federal-Reserves-Stress-Test-Results-Predictable.pdf  
Granja, João. 2023. “Bank Fragility and Reclassification of Securities into HTM.” SSRN 
Electronic Journal, April 21, 2023.  
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4409834 
46
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 30 ---
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, Jeremy C. Stein, and Adi Sunderam. 2017. 
“Strengthening and Streamlining Bank Capital Regulation.” Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity 48, no. 2: 479–565.  
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/strengthening-and-streamlining-bank-capital-
regulation/ 
Gruenberg, Martin J. 2022. “Quarterly Banking Profile – Third Quarter 2022.” Speech 
delivered at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Washington, DC, December 1, 
2022.  
https://www.fdic.gov/news/speeches/2022/spdec0122.html 
Hanson, Samuel G., Victoria Ivashina, Laura Nicolae, Jermey C. Stein, Adi Sunderam, and 
Daniel K. Tarullo. 2024. “The Evolution of Banking in the 21st Century: Evidence and 
Regulatory Implications.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 55, no. 1: 343–411.  
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-evolution-of-banking-in-the-21st-century/  
Hirtle, Beverly. 2018. “The Past and Future of Supervisory Stress Testing Design.” Speech 
delivered at the Federal Reserve Stress Testing Research Conference sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA, October 9, 2018. 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2018/hir181009 
Hsu, Michael J. 2024. “Building Better Brakes for a Faster Financial World.” Speech 
delivered at Columbia Law School, New York, NY, January 18, 2024.  
https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/speeches/2024/pub-speech-2024-4.pdf  
International Lending Supervision Act of 1983 (Int’l Lending Supervision Act). 1983. 
“Capital adequacy.” 12 U.S.C. §3907.  
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/12/3907 
Jiang, Erica, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. 2024. “Monetary Tightening 
and the U.S. Bank Fragility in 2023: Mark-to-Market Losses and Uninsured Depositor 
Runs?” SSRN Electronic Journal, April 8, 2024.  
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4387676 
Judge, Kathryn. 2022. “Stress Testing during Times of War.” In Handbook of Financial Stress 
Testing, edited by J. Doyne Farmer, Alissa M. Kleinnijenhuis, Til Schuermann, and Thom 
Wetzer, 224–44. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108903011.015 
Kang-Landsberg, Alena, Stephan Luck, and Matthew Plosser. 2023. “Deposit Betas: Up, Up, 
and Away?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), April 11, 
2023.  
https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2023/04/deposit-betas-up-up-and-away/  
Koont, Naz, Tano Santos, and Luigi Zingales. 2024. “Destabilizing Digital ‘‘Bank Walks’.’“ 
George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy & the State Working Paper No. 328, 
May 2024.  
47
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 31 ---
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4443273 
Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. 2008. “Preliminary 2008 Earnings Conference Call 
(transcript).” June 9, 2008. 
https://web.stanford.edu/~jbulow/lehmandocs/docs/DEBTORS/LBHI_SEC07940_255448
0-2554534.pdf 
Luck, Stephan, and Matthew Plosser. 2024. “Deposits and the March 2023 Banking Crisis–A 
Retrospective.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), March 
27, 2024.  
https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2024/03/deposits-and-the-march-2023-
banking-crisis-a-retrospective/  
Menand, Lev, and Ricks Morgan. 2024. “Rebuilding Banking Law: Banks as Public Utilities.” 
Yale Journal on Regulation 41, no. 2: 591–651”.  
https://www.yalejreg.com/print/rebuilding-banking-law/ 
Oblack, Sean. 2023. “BPI and ABA Seek Transparency around Fed Supervisory Models and 
Stress Scenarios.” Bank Policy Institute, July 25, 2023.  
https://bpi.com/bpi-and-aba-seek-transparency-around-fed-supervisory-models-and-
stress-scenarios/ 
Quarles, Randal K. 2019. “Stress Testing: A Decade of Continuity and Change.” Speech 
delivered at the ’Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review research conference sponsored 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA, July 9, 2019.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20190709a.htm  
Sarin, Natasha. 2021. “Dynamic Regulation.” Southern California Law Review 94, no. 5: 
1005–82.  
https://southerncalifornialawreview.com/2022/02/11/dynamic-regulation-by-natasha-
sarin/ 
Sarin, Natasha, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2016. “Understanding Bank Risk through 
Market Measures.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 47, no. 2: 57–127.  
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/sarintextfall16bpea.pdf  
Schuermann, Til. 2016. “Stress Testing in Wartime and in Peacetime.” In Stress Testing and 
Macroprudential Regulation: A Trans-Atlantic Assessment, edited by Ronald W. Anderson, 
125–39. London, UK: CEPR Press.  
https://cepr.org/publications/books-and-reports/stress-testing-and-macroprudential-
regulation-transatlantic 
———. 2020. “Capital Adequacy Pre- and Postcrisis and the Role of Stress Testing.” Journal 
of Money, Credit and Banking 52, no. S1: 87–105. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jmcb.12735 
48
Stressing the Stress Tests Sarin and Schuermann

--- Page 32 ---
Scott, Andrew P., and Marc Labonte. 2023. “Bank Capital Requirements: A Primer and 
Policy Issues.” Congressional Research Service, March 9, 2023. 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47447  
Snyder, Bill. 2010. “Anat Admati: Why Bank Equity Is Not Expensive.” Insights by Stanford 
Business, September 1, 2010. 
https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/anat-admati-why-bank-equity-not-expensive 
Tarullo, Daniel K. 2016. “Next Steps in the Evolution of Stress Testing.” Speech given at Yale 
University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, CT, September 26, 2016. 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/tarullo20160926a.htm  
———. 2020. “Are We Seeing the Demise of Stress Testing?” Brookings Institution, 
Commentary, June 25, 2020.  
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/stress-testing/  
———. 2022. “Bank Supervision and Administrative Law.” Columbia Business Law Review 
2022, no. 1: 279–401. 
https://doi.org/10.52214/cblr.v2022i1.9983 
———. 2024. “Reconsidering the Regulatory Uses of Stress Testing.” Brookings Institution, 
Research, May 22, 2024.  
https://www.brookings.edu/articles/reconsidering-the-regulatory-uses-of-stress-testing/ 
Wessel, David. 2023. “Talking to Dan Tarullo about Bank Mergers, Stress Tests, and 
Supervision.” Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings, August 10, 2023. 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/Talking-to-Dan-Tarullo-
about-bank-mergers-stress-tests-and-supervision.pdf. 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
49
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3