--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 4 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Pedro Machado Lessons Learned: Pedro Machado 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Finance Commons, Macroeconomics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, and Evaluation 
Commons, and the Policy History, Theory, and Methods Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Pedro Machado," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 4, 
27-29. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1673 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss4/2 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss4/2

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Pedro Machado  
By Mercedes Cardona 
Pedro Machado began his career as a legal advis er to the European Central Bank in the years 
leading up the Global Financial Crisis ( GFC), then joined the Bank of Portugal  (BOP) in 2006, 
where he has held several positions . He was chief of staff to Portugal’s minister of state and 
finance in 2011, during the European Sovereign Debt Crisis, when the government negotiated 
a bailout with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and European Union. He returned to the 
BOP, as deputy director of the prudential supervision department, while the program was being 
implemented. The EUR 78 billion bailout was largely a success, reducing deficits, improving 
Portugal’s bond yields, and eventually reducing unemployment below pre-GFC levels by the end 
of the decade. Machado joined the European Union’s Single Resolution Board (SRB) in 2020 as 
head of resolution planning and decisions. This Lessons Learned is based on an interview held 
in January 2025; the full transcript is available here. 
In a crisis, ownership of the pro cess, stakeholder engagement , and institutional 
strength are crucial to the speed and success of any stability measures.  
Machado noted that the GFC was one of the most unstable economic periods Portugal had 
experienced since the First Republic, the period  between the fall of the monarchy in 1910 
and the coup that installed a military regime in 1926. But , he continued,  the IMF’s rescue 
plan for Portugal was enacted with less opposition than the Greek bailout during that same 
period and was largely more successful than the programs in Greece and Italy.  
Portugal emerged from the three -year plan in better shape, with lower unemployment and 
improved economic growth. Machado pointed to the institutional strength of the country—
in financial, economic, and social terms —as the underpinning of its success. He  three key 
elements for this result:  
The first was the idea of ownership. The program was ours in the sense that the 
program would not be implem ented as something being imposed on us. Of course, 
there is this issue that the program was agreed to with international institutions, or 
European institutions, but the program would be undertaken by us as our own. There 
should be a deep commitment to the involvement and the engagement from all parts 
of the state, starting from the very high levels through the lower layers of the public 
administration. I think that idea of ownership was a very important one in contrast, 
for instance, to my knowledge, to the case of Greece. 
The second key pillar for me was the broad stakeholder engagement or involvement. 
The program had three pillars. It had the fiscal pillar, it had the structural reforms 
pillar, and it had the financial stability pillar. When you look at whatever was needed 
in terms of execution of each of those pillars, there was always a very deep 
involvement at the level of certain interest groups that represented key stakeholders 
in those processes. . . . 
27

--- Page 4 ---
And then finally, I think there was a certain ins titutional strength, which was a  
surprise to me. I thought that the institutional framework in Portugal was more feeble 
than it [was] revealed to be. There was also an organization set  up from the very 
beginning, which reported directly to the prime minist er. It was called  EXAM [or 
sometimes ESAME, for Estrutura de Acompanhamento dos Memorandos —the 
Structure for Monitoring the Memoranda ]. It was a horizontal structure, which 
basically was entrusted with monitoring all the key milestones of the program and 
coordinating the preparation of each of the quarterly reviews that were undertaken 
by the Troika. 
Establishing resolution processes before a crisis increases readiness ; testing these 
processes can provide policymakers with invaluable experience and information that 
improve their ability to address a crisis.  
When Banco Espirit o Santo (BES) collapsed in 2014 and the government had to step in to 
resolve the institution, the risk to the Portuguese economy was great. But, said Machado, the 
Bank of Portugal was well positioned to address the situation. He described how the central 
bank had been monitoring the European Union’s process of developing its Bank Resolution 
and Recovery Directive (BRRD)  but decided to proceed with drafting its own resolution 
directives rather than wait on the EU to adopt the BRRD.  
We decided very early in the program to speed up the resolution framework. The 
BRRD was being discussed at the time, and it was considered. Many times, we 
struggled with the fact that: Should we wait fo r the BRRD? Because we ’re talking 
about 2011; the discussions were starting, and we thought that maybe this was such 
a key legislative piece for the European Union that this was going to be accelerated. 
But then we saw in 2012 that things were not really g etting to the speed that we 
would be expecting. So we decided not to wait for the BRRD. We front -loaded much 
of the regime of the BRRD into our own resolution framework, which we adopted by 
the end of 2012.  
I think this idea of front -loading, of not really waiting for certain developments to 
occur on very key pieces of legislation , is very important to cope with cris es, and in 
particular banking crisis management. So we didn ’t wait. Of course, we took a risk 
because the BRRD was still at a very incipient state, so we could not draw so much 
from there. But I think with hindsight, we anticipated broadly the framework of the 
BRRD. If you make a comparison, the differences are not that big between both pieces 
of legislation. 
Machado also described how once the resolution infrastructure was in place, the Bank of 
Portugal and the finance ministry conducted a dry run on the basis of  another bank, which 
proved very valuable as a learning exercise.  
It was a very relevant exercise in regard to the key findings that it allowed us to draw 
on, and also on the experience and the readiness. Even things like: How do you 
prepare for resolution? The logistics inside the resolution authority: Who should get 
28
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 4

--- Page 5 ---
access immediately? How do we set up a team quickly? Access rights, hiring of the 
independent valuer—which kind of data parameters  do you need for the valuation? 
All this was tested during this dry run, which means that when we were unexpectedly 
hit with this crisis in mid -2014, a large chunk of the preparedness part was in place 
at the Bank of Portugal. The Bank of Portugal teams were quite proficient because 
they had been not only deeply in volved in the preparation of the resolution 
framework, but also in building certain expertise because we had conducted some 
simulation exercises, which were quite granular. 
Front-loading turned out to be a good decision. Machado highly recommends the process to 
other central banks: 
I think pre-crisis preparedness and readiness is of the essence, and you only achieve 
it with sound legal frameworks, sound policies, but in particular with testing and 
operationalization. For me, this is the key driver. If in a country, in whatever country, 
you want to build crisis management preparedness, you have to go through these 
exercises. It’s very key. Otherwise, the probability that you will not be successful is 
very high. So for me, this is a major lesson learned from that. 
Dated: December 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2024–21 
29
Lessons Learned: Pedro Machado Cardona