--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Jesper Berg Lessons Learned: Jesper Berg 
Maryann Haggerty 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Haggerty, Maryann (2025) "Lessons Learned: Jesper Berg," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 
707-710. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1638 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/28 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss1/28

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Jesper Berg 
By Maryann Haggerty 
The career of Jesper Berg, a Danish economist, has spanned multiple financial crises. He held 
positions with the Danish central bank, Danmarks Nationalbank, from 2004  to 2010, first as 
head of market operations and later as head of financial stability. He had served as head of the 
capital markets and financial structure division at the European Central Bank  from 2000 to 
2004, and earlier he was an economist at the International Monetary Fund’s Exchange and 
Trade Relations Department. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview with Berg 
in December 2022, when he was director general of the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority; 
the full transcript may be accessed here. 
Central banks have to focus on the details of liquidity: an o verreliance on foreign 
liquidity can expose the financial system to a sudden credit crunch and global 
contagion. 
In the years leading up to the 2007 –09 Global Financial Crisis (GFC), the Danish financial 
system increasingly relied on funding from abroad, Berg recalled.  
It was clearly, in hindsight, a mistake that there was not sufficient focus on the 
potential funding issues of relying so much on foreign supplies of liquidity, including 
for banks, which were at a size where they, in retrospect, had difficulties in getting 
liquidity during a financial crisis. 
When the US financial system faltered in 2008, that contagion transmitted to Denmark. Berg 
said, 
The big US investment banks and other banks [that] had access to the Federal Reserve 
decided to stop providing liquidity from their facilities at the Fed to the rest of the 
world. These were the banks which were the heart of the financial system . . . pumping 
liquidity across the globe. . . . When they stopped making liquidity available, the whole 
blood circulation in the international financial system stopped. For a country where 
there was substantial international borrowing to finance lending, that was a disaster. 
Denmark had about $20 billion in US dollar reserves before the crisis, Berg said. There was 
a belief that reserves did not need to be higher , in part because the country had access to 
swap lines with the European Central Bank, and in part because Denmark could issue US 
commercial paper to easily get dollars.  
However, the US commercial paper market dried up after [the collapse of the US 
investment bank] Lehman [Brothers]. Our foreign exchange reserves dropped from 
what was the equivalent of 160 billion Danish krone to around [DKK] 100 [billion]. 
We thought that if we went below [DKK] 100 [billion], we would send a signal to the 
market that we really had serious problems. Then we looked at the pension funds. 
707

--- Page 4 ---
The pension funds had substantial holdings of German bonds, and, basica lly, we 
issued Danish krone bonds for them and got the German bonds, which we used to 
prop up the foreign exchange reserves. Since then, we’ve operated with a much higher 
target for foreign exchange reserve. But it was really an awful surprise to discover 
that financial markets were completely dead and that even we, a triple-A borrower, 
could not issue commercial paper. That was a lesson to be learned. . . .  
The lesson you can take away is that there are times when financial markets dry up 
completely, and where even if you have a triple-A rating, you can ’t get anybody to 
invest, even in short-term paper. 
If you have to simplify financial stability, consider these f ive lessons for bankers, 
supervisors, and others. 
Based on his experiences through several financial crises, Berg distilled a list of lessons he 
said bankers, supervisors, and other s with roles in the financial system need to remember 
from one era to the next: 
I think that lesson number one, have as high capital requirements as you can get away 
with. [The] Basel II [global regulatory framework] was a disaster. I’m not making the 
argument that banks should tomorrow build extremely high capital, and they should 
go out on the markets. I ’m making the argument that as banks make money, they 
should set aside money for capital, and it should grow to a much higher level than 8% 
of risk-weighted assets. 
Lesson number two, manage your liquidity better. Do not get into a situation where 
you are so dependent on international markets. Have liquidity buffers. 
Lesson number three. Forward -looking provisions are really, really good, because 
they create an extra buffer on top of capital. 
Lesson number four, you can do write -downs of bank debt, and you should, because 
what’s really important in terms of financial stability is customers’ access to funding, 
access to their money come Monday morning—and not all of the money. 
Lesson number five, do not do forbearance, but do act quickly and at an early stage in 
terms of sorting ou t bank problems. Try to get mergers with a sound bank at a very 
early stage instead of when capital is depleted.  
The more prepared policymakers, the government, the banks, and the economy are, 
the better the country will be able to withstand a crisis. 
Beginning with the Nordic crisis of the 1990s, Berg discussed how preparedness can make a 
huge difference in a country’s experience during a crisis: 
In the early ’90s, you had a Scandinavian banking crisis, which was quite a significant 
event. Denmark did a lot better than Sweden, Norway, and Finland during that crisis. 
708
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
Norway nationalized all its big banks. Sweden nationalized one of its biggest [banks] 
and provided a blanket guarantee. Denmark avoided that and only had a midsize bank 
and a few others that failed. One reason we did better was that we, at that time, had 
very elevated capital requirements. We almost had the equivalent of an 8% leverage 
ratio. On top of that, we had forward -looking provisions. The problem during the 
[Global] Financial Crisis, where we did much worse than the other Nordic countries, 
was that we had converted to Basel II and lowered capital requirements significantly. 
We also implemented international accounting standards, where you did not do 
forward-looking provisions. We were a sitting duck when the crisis hit. We’ve learned 
from that since then. Eight percent risk-weighted capital is not enough, when you go 
from a “going” to a “gone” concern during a crisis. 
In the years after the GFC, Denmark took steps to enhance the functioning of its banks and 
improve stability. Notably, explained Berg, it introduced “more intrusive supervision”:  
We’ve gone from being very much a check-the-boxes supervisor, legal checks like the 
[Securities and Exchange Commission] , to being a more risk-based supervisor that 
allocates our resources to where we think risks are. We are very intrusive in terms of 
how we do things. . .  . We have very close supervision of the [systemically important 
financial institutions] , the largest financial instituti ons. We implement the full 
package of Basel and of [European Union] legislation. 
We are the only country in Europe that has also added [total loss-absorbing capacity] 
buffers to the small banks. We ’ve used whatever opportunity we had 
opportunistically to increase capital.  
The changes that Denmark has made to stabilize its banks since the GFC were mirrored in its 
fiscal and economic position. When the COVID-19 pandemic hit in 2020, it was a shock to the 
system, Berg said. But Denmark wasn’t the worst. “In terms of the general handling of COVID, 
we did reasonably well,” he added. And from that, Berg drew one more lesson: 
The COVID crisis was the first time where . . . macro fundamentals, the fiscal position, 
and Danish financial system were incredibly strong. We had not had that combination 
since 1970. That helped us through the COVID crisis and has helped us through 
Ukraine in a way, which I think is really a lesson to be learned. When you are first in 
a crisis , there are few things you can do. The key thing is to be in a good position 
before you enter a crisis. 
. . .   
The lesson of Denmark is also that this time around we’ve done much better, because 
we were in a position of strength in terms of the financial system, in terms of public 
finances, in terms of the macro economy. We have an unemployment rate of 3% right 
now. We have banks with solvency ratios of about 20. We have a strong fiscal position. 
We have a current account surplus of 8 to 10% of GDP. Obviously, all countries can ’t 
have that. But playing from a position of strength is really a key lesson. Also, in terms 
of banks, [it’s important] that banks are in a position where they do not need to worry 
709
Lessons Learned : Jesper Berg Haggerty

--- Page 6 ---
about their capital position when they lend. We had a credit crunch during the 
financial crisis. This time we haven’t seen anything like a credit crunch. 
Dated: April 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022–24 
710
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1