--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 3 
2025 
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy 
Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 
Divya Kirti 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
Maria Soledad Martinez Peria 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
Prachi Mishra 
Isaac Center for Public Policy, Ashoka University 
Jan Strasky 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Kirti, Divya; Soledad Martinez Peria, Maria; Mishra, Prachi; and Strasky, Jan (2025) "What Policy 
Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19," Journal of 
Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 3, 50-83. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1667 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss3/3 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote 
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), its management and executive board, or IMF policy and should not be 
reported as representing the official views of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) or of its member countries. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol7/iss3/3

--- Page 3 ---
What Policy Combinations Worked?:  
The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending 
during COVID-191 
Divya Kirti,2 Maria Soledad Martinez Peria,3 Prachi Mishra,4 and Jan Strasky5 
Abstract 
In response to COVID-19, countries frequently adopted multiple types of policies to address 
the economic and financial effects of the pandemic. This paper analyzes the impact on bank 
lending of combinations or packages of policies (fiscal, monetary, and prudential) adopted 
across a broad sa mple of countries. Using a comprehensive policy announcement –level 
dataset together with bank -level information, we find that lending grew faster at banks in 
countries that announced large packages combining fiscal, monetary, and prudential 
measures (“all-out” packages), especially when uncertainty was high. Both the scope and size 
of policy packages were important: packages combining all three types of policies, but where 
only some were large, were relatively less effective in enhancing credit. The impact was 
stronger among more constrained banks with low equity levels. “ all-out” packages also 
increased liquidity for bank-dependent firms but did not disproportionately benefit unviable 
firms. 
Keywords: bank lending, COVID-19, policy effectiveness, policy packages 
JEL Classifications: E52, E58, E62, G21, G28
 
 
 
1 The views expressed  in this paper are those  of the authors and do not necessarily r epresent those of the 
International Monetary Fund ( IMF), its management and executive board, or IMF policy and should not be 
reported as representing the official views of the Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development 
(OECD) or of its member countries.   
See Kirti et al. (2025) for additional details and figures not included in this paper. 
2 Divya Kirti, Economist, International Monetary Fund, dkirti@imf.org. 
3 Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, Assistant Director, International Monetary Fund, mmartinezperia@imf.org. 
4 Prachi Mishra, Professor of Economics, and Head and Director, Isaac Center for Public Policy, Ashoka University, 
prachi.mishra@ashoka.edu.in. 
5 Jan Strasky, Senior Economist, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, jan.strasky@oecd.org. 
50

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction 
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic triggered a dramatic—and somewhat peculiar—global 
economic downturn. Countries faced rapid and sharp negative supply and demand shocks 
simultaneously. Deep uncertainty  was a defining feature  of the shock . Throughout 2020, 
countries responded to the large shock by adopting different combinations of fiscal , 
monetary, and prudential policies.  Crucially, very different types of policies were often 
introduced simultaneously.  Take a prominent example: At the same time  that various 
governments throughout Europe announced guarantee schemes  and tax deferrals  (for 
example, Italy and German y), the European Central Bank ( ECB) also announced long-term 
refinancing operations and the Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme, and asked banks 
not to distribute dividends. Many of these policies either directly targeted the banking sector 
or had the potential to affect it.6  
This paper evaluates the effectiveness of combinations of economic and prudential policies 
in supporting bank lending during the pandemic , across a large sample of  advanced and 
emerging economies. Earlier work on the impact of separate policies adopted during COVID-
19 (Altavilla, Barbiero, et al. 2023; Beck and Keil 2022; Chodorow-Reich et al. 2022; Granja 
et al. 2022—see Section II for a comprehensive discussion) delivers well-identified granular 
results on th e role of specific policies (for example , lending operations, guarantees, 
government lending programs to firms, etc.). While work taking this approach is  helpful, it 
necessarily holds other policies fix ed and hence cannot speak to  the role of policy 
combinations.  
Our paper is the first to examine the effect of different combinations of policies on bank 
lending for a large sample of countries. Exploring policy combinations is important as stand-
alone policies were rare during 2020. More than 80% of policy configurations in our sample 
included combinations of more than one of fiscal, monetary, or prudential policies that we 
refer to as “packages .”7 Moreover, by presenting evidence from both bank-level and firm -
level estimations, our paper speaks to not only how different policy combinations affected  
bank lending but also how packages influenced firms’ ability to continue to operate thanks 
to the impact of policies on bank financing. Firm-level estimations also allow us to consider 
whether bank lending supported ex ante weak firms. 
We rely on a  new granular dataset that measures policy action s taken by countries to 
respond to COVID -19 (Kirti et al. 2023). The dataset includes detailed information on 27 
policies, which are classified into three categories: fiscal, monetary , and prudential. The 
dataset also contains announcement dates and  wherever possible  measures of size of 
policies and programs. We combine this policy announcement dataset with  quarterly bank-
 
6 Given the regulatory reforms implemented after the Global Financial Crisis  of 2007 –09, banks generally 
entered the crisis seemingly in good shape. There are exceptions, of course, as in the case of some countries 
dealing with legacy asset quality concerns ( for example, Ukraine) or rising nonperforming loans even before 
the pandemic (India and China to some extent). 
7 Even with more granular policy classifications and at higher frequencies, policies were introduced in packages 
(Kirti et al. 2023). 
51
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
level information across 49 countr ies to examine the behavior of bank lending in response 
to different policy combinations or packages. To support our analysis at the bank level, we  
also collect quarterly firm -level data across 39 countries and examine whether countries’ 
COVID-19 policy packages translated into additional liquidity support for nonfinancial firms 
during the pandemic. 
Different policies could have affected bank lending through diverse channels. First, certain 
policies could have changed banks’ incentives to lend at the margin. Such policies include 
those with the potential to lower the probability of borrower  default (for example, direct 
transfers and tax relief or deferrals to firms and households), reduce expected losses in the 
case of defaults (for example, credit guarantees), or lower the cost of funding ( for example, 
conventional and unconventional monetary policies). Second, some policies may have 
changed the tightness of constraints faced by banks, for example, by increasing balance sheet 
capacity to lend ( such as temporary relaxations of capital, provisioning, or liquidity 
requirements) or by affecting bank balance sheets more generally (such as restrictions on 
dividend distributions). Third,  several macro policies could have shifted the demand for 
credit (for example, relaxations of monetary or fiscal tools). As the pandemic unfolded, there 
was significant uncertainty about whether only some or all of these channels were relevant. 
Whether and which  channels were  more important to address , and therefore  which 
combinations of policies were effective in influencing  overall bank lending, is not obvious . 
For example , fiscal policies  or monetary policies  could have independently supported 
demand and changed banks’ incentives to lend at the margin . Similarly, prudential policie s 
alone could have significantly expanded banks ’ capacity to lend without the need  for other 
policies. At the same  time, given that the shock was unprecedented and uncertainty so 
large—both surrounding the effects of policies  and the channels through which lending 
could be stimulated—a combination of policies with the potential to work through different 
channels may have been the most effective. Ultimately, understanding how different policy 
combinations affect bank lending is an empirical question. So too is assessing the degree to 
which the size of policies mattered. While in principle  larger-sized policies could have 
increased lending more, it is also plausible that nonlinearities were important (for example, 
larger policies above a certain size could have been  ineffective in further supporting  
lending).   
We find that both the scope and size of policy packages were critical: packages combining all 
three categories of policies, but where only some were large, were relatively less effective. 
In fact, statistical tests reveal that “ all-out” packages—combining large fiscal and monetary 
along with prudential policies—were economically and statistically more effective in raising 
bank credit compared to any other policy package observed in the data and relative to a no-
policy counterfactual. “All-out” packages were associated with 600-basis-point (bp) higher 
loan growth compared to small packages, whe re neither monetary or fiscal policies were 
large, or when only one of them was of large size . Our main findings are consistent with the 
interpretation that “ all-out” packages were able to target shifts ac ross several key 
channels—incentives, capacity to lend, and credit demand —and therefore, were more 
effective in increasing bank lending. Importantly, we find evidence that the  effects were 
52
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 6 ---
larger in the presence of more uncertainty, as measured by greater disagreement among 
forecasters on the impact of the pandemic and the future path of economic output. 
Furthermore, because the impact of policies likely varied depending on banks’ capacity to 
lend at the start of the pandemic, it is important to consider  the interaction of countries’ 
policies with precrisis bank characteristics, and in particular capitalization levels . Across 
banks within the same country, we find that the impact of policies was larger for banks that 
were a priori more constrained to lend  owing to low equity levels. The empirical 
specifications attempt to control for  credit demand by including various proxies for the 
health, financial, and economic shock associated with the pandemic. In some estimations, we 
are also able to include country-quarter fixed effects. These findings suggest that binding 
constraints that affected  banks’ marginal incentives to lend , and supply of loans,  were 
important in holding back credit growth.  
Our baseline methodology and key robustness exercises confirm that our results can indeed 
be attributed to the scope and size of policy packages. Potential sources of bias could, in 
principle, apply in either direction. For example, countries may have incorpor ated 
expectations about future outcomes in credit markets in designing their policy responses. 
Importantly, as we relate lagged policies to subsequent outcomes, such concerns about 
reverse causality would push against our ability to find meaningful effects . Equally, large 
reductions in credit at the depth of the pandemic could set the stage for strong mean 
reversion, biasing our results upwards. Our results remain similar if we control for lagged 
credit growth, suggesting that such dynamics do not drive our results.  
Additional robustness exercises show that o ur bank -level results are not driven by our 
specific approach to defining  large policies . In our baseline estimations, we define large 
policies as those in the top decile of the distribution across countrie s. In additional 
estimations, we confirm that the results are qualitatively similar  if we define as large 
packages those with policies in the top quartile, tercile, and median of the distribution.  
We combine bank -level evidence with findings at the firm level , which allows us to 
understand whether policy packages increased firms’ ability to meet precrisis expenses, as 
well as to consider whether bank lending supported ex ante weak firms. Consistent with our 
results at the bank level, we find that packages combining large fiscal, monetary, and 
prudential measures helped provide bank-dependent firms with additional liquidity to allow 
them to stay afloat and pay their expen ses while pandemic -linked health measures 
constrained their ability to generate revenue. Within bank -dependent firms, we do not find 
differential effects in the extent to which liquidity was available to firms displaying poor pre-
pandemic performance. Whil e economic and financial policy packages  during COVID -19 
were generally not narrowly targeted, this latter evidence suggests that policy support at 
least did not disproportionately benefit unviable firms. 
The findings of this paper are relevant beyond understanding how policy combinations 
affected bank lending during COVID-19. In an uncertain world with growing fragmentation, 
potentially more frequent large shocks,  along with  lack of clarity on the direction and 
53
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
magnitude of domestic and global policies, drawing lessons on crisis management from  the 
COVID-19 crisis remains highly pertinent. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the relevant literature  and 
this paper’s contribution to it. Section III describes the data we use, while section IV presents 
the empirical methodology. Section V summarizes our main results. Section VI concludes. 
II. Literature Review 
Our paper is related to three strands of the literature on the  impact of COVID-19 on firms 
and banks. First, several papers explore the effects of the pandemic and of individual policies 
on bank credit . This literature includes studies on the impact of the Paycheck Protection 
Program (Bartik et al. 2023; Beck and Keil 2022; Berger et al. 2025; Granja et al. 2022) and 
of the pandemic on bank lending in the U nited States. Dursun-de Neef and Schandlbauer 
(2022) documents that US banks with higher exposure to COVID-19 decreased their lending 
less when their deposits increased owing to a reduction in household spending . Other 
studies, focused on other individual countries, examine the impact of guarantees on bank 
lending (Acosta-Henao et al. 2023 for Chile; Cascarino et al. 2022 for Italy; Jiménez et al. 2024 
for Spain ; Altavilla, Ellul , et al. 2023 for several euro area economies) or countercyclical 
capital buffer releases (BCBS 2021; Couaillier et al. 2022) on bank lending . More closely 
related to our paper, Ҫolak and Öztekin (2021) analyzes loan growth at the bank level during 
the pandemic, comparing it to the pre -pandemic period. Although the authors focus on the 
effect of the pandemic itself , they also find a role for  fiscal and monetary stimulus  in 
supporting demand for bank lending. Concentrating on European banks, Dursun-de Neef and 
Schandlbauer (2021) shows that higher exposure to COVID -19 led to a relative increase in 
worse-capitalized banks’ loans , whereas their better -capitalized peers decreased their 
lending more . Casanova, Hardy, and Onen  (2021) empirically examine s how changes in 
banks’ lending capacity —which they attribute to (but do not directly link with) policy 
measures—affected loan growth during the pandemic. The  authors also examine the 
response of bank lending to the size of loan guarantee programs and find a positive 
association. Altavilla, Barbiero et al. (2023) employs proprietary data from ECB’s monetary 
policy operations and banking supervision to achieve a strong identification of the effects on 
bank lending of targeted long -term refinancing operations and selected prudential 
supervisory policies. They find strong effects on lending as well as complementarity among 
the measures, echoing our result that policy packages combining many levers are the most 
effective. At the same time, the geographic scope is limited to the euro area, and they do not 
consider fiscal policies or interactions between broader policy categories.  
Second, several papers examine the impact of the C OVID-19 shock but focus on  outcome 
variables other than bank lending  such as  corporate stock returns (Alfaro et al. 2020 ; 
Capelle-Blancard and Desroziers 2020; Cox, Greenwald, and Ludvigson 2020; ElFayoumi and 
Hengge 2021), corporate insolvencies (Demmou et al. 2021; Gourinchas et al. 2022; Guerini 
et al. 2020), listed firms’ performance (Igan, Mirzaei, and Moore 2023), employment (Autor 
et al. 2022; Granja et al. 2022; Hubbard and Strain 2020), and bank equity prices (Demirgüç-
Kunt, Pedraza, and Ruiz-Ortega 2021; Valencia et al. 2021).  
54
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 8 ---
Finally, there is work on related policy issues in the context of the pandemic. Several papers 
analyze patterns in the use of preexisting credit lines at the start of the pandemic and find 
increasing importance of government interventions, such as the Federal Reserve’s corporate 
bond buying program (Acharya and Steffen  2020; Chodorow-Reich et al. 2022; Greenwald, 
Krainer, and Paul  2023; Li, Strahan , and Zhang 2020). Augusti n et al. (2022) use s the 
heterogeneity in the COVID-19 lockdown measures to identify fiscal space as the main driver 
of the sovereign risk premia in advanced economies and among US states during COVID-19. 
Benmelech and Tzur -Ilan (2020) link s policy responses to  COVID-19 to  pre-pandemic 
policies (for example, the level of interest rates for monetary policy and sovereign credit 
ratings for fiscal policy). Similarly, Bergant and Forbes (2023) examines the determinants of 
the policy mix adopted in the wake of the pandemic and find s that existing policy space is 
the main driver affecting the choice of policies, albeit less so for fiscal policies in advanced 
economies.  
Our paper contributes to all three strands of literature by analyzing the effects of policy 
combinations or packages on bank lending using the most c omprehensive dataset to date 
across a large sample of countries. Analyzing policy packages is crucial because policies were 
rarely adopted in isolation but were frequently introduced in tandem.  
Another contribution comes from our firm -level analysis, whic h allows us to examine the 
impact of policy packages on firms’ ability to meet pre -pandemic expenses with bank 
financing and to ascertain whether packages were more likely to support unviable firms. 
III. Data 
We assemble and use three main datasets. We obtain bank balance sheet and income 
statement data at a quarterly frequency from S& P Capital IQ Pro . The bank -level dataset 
includes roughly 1,500 banks operating in 49 countries: 18 advanced economies (AEs) and 
31 emerging market and developing countries (EMDEs).8 The main variable of interest from 
this dataset is net customer loans. Figure 1 shows the distribution of quarterly growth of net 
customer loans  across countries  for Q4 2019–Q1 2021. There is  a marked decline in 
quarterly loan growth across all countries at the start of the pandemic, followed by a steady 
recovery.  
 
8 The following countries are included in our sample . AEs: Austria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, 
Finland, France, Israel, Italy, Japan, South Korea, L atvia, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, 
United States; and EMDEs: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Ghana, India, Indonesia, 
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, 
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, 
Vietnam. The countries that are not included  (for example, Germany or Spain) are those for which S&P does 
not have quarterly bank-level financial statements. 
55
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1: Credit Growth, Q4 2019–Q1 2021 
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of quarterly growth in net customer loans at the country level for our 
sample of 49 countries. For countries included in the sample, data are available for at least five banks covering 
either 60% of assets reported in annual data or $100 billion in assets. Loan growth for each country-quarter is 
an average of growth at the bank level winsorized at the fifth and 95th percentiles within  the quarter. 
Percentiles may represent different countries in different quarters.  IQR is the interquartile range. 
Sources: S&P Capital IQ Pro; authors’ estimates. 
Figure 2 compares the level of lending during 2020 to pre-pandemic levels (indexed to the 
last quarter of 2019 ). The figure show s a significant decline in lending during Q1 2020 for 
countries in the bottom quartile of the sample, a very small drop for the median country, and 
practically no change for countries in the top quartile of the sample. For countries above the 
median of the distribution , lending recovered quickly and exceeded pre -pandemic levels, 
while for countries below the 25th percentile, credit had barely recovered to precrisis levels 
even by the end of 2020. This suggests significant heterogeneity across countries and banks 
in terms of lending behavior and potentially their response to policies. The goal of this paper 
is to evaluate whether how policies were combined played a role in explaining the variation 
in credit across countries, banks, and over time. 
56
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 2: Credit Index to Pre-COVID-19 Levels , Q4 2019–Q1 2021 
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of net customer loans indexed to Q4 2019 (pre -COVID-19) at the 
country level using the same sample as in Figure 1. Indexed loan levels for each country -quarter are averages 
of bank-level data winsorized at the fifth and 95th percentiles within the quarter. Percentiles may represent 
different countries in different quarters. 
Sources: S&P Capital IQ Pro; authors’ estimates. 
To understand the role of policies in explaining developments in bank credit, we use a new 
comprehensive announcement-level panel dataset tracking fiscal, monetary, and prudential 
policy responses to COVID-19 at a daily frequency and granular level. The database provides 
detailed information for 27 granular policies  (including information on their sizes where 
available), adopted by 74 countries during 2020 (Kirti et al. 2023). It is built starting from 
the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF’s) Policy Tracker—which draws on the institution’s 
regular global surveillance activities and provides an account and summary of the main 
policies that countries adopted in response to COVID-19—and combined with informati on 
from several additional sources includ ing other existing trackers, government websites, 
news reports, and various reports from government agencies and the private sector. Overall, 
merging information and cross -checking facts from a series of alternative  sources helps to 
provide a more comprehensive and accurate description of the policy annou ncements in 
response to COVID-19. In the analysis that follows, the focus is on the 49 countries for which 
we have quarterly bank-level data as well as information on the policies adopted in response 
to COVID-19. 
The policies are categorized into three broad groups: fiscal, monetary, and prudential. Fiscal 
policies include direct support to households and firms (for example, grants, tax relief, tax 
deferral, and equity participation) as well as public guarantees and loans. We also include  
moratoria provided by the government . Monetary policies encompass both conventional 
(changes in interest rates and reserve requirements) and unconventional measures  (asset 
purchases) along with lending operations. Prudential policies refer to measures targeted at 
relaxing capital constraints of banks (for example, macroprudential buffers), and noncapital 
57
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
measures such as those related to liquidity, lending standards, and supervisory expectations. 
Overall, we consider 27 policy measures: seven fiscal, nine monetary, and 11 prudential.9  
Figure 3 shows the frequency of different combinations of policies  announced by the 49 
countries in our data during 2020. A key stylized fact in the data is that announcements were 
highly correlated across the three groups of policies: fiscal, monetary, and prudential. About 
90% and 70% of countries used all three  policies simultaneously in the first and second 
quarters, respectively.10 In later quarters, we find more  variation, with only about 25% of 
countries using all three types of policies in the fourth quarter of 2020.  
Figure 3: Policy Package Distribution , Q1 2020–Q4 2020 
Notes: This figure shows how country policy announcements were distributed into packages comprising fiscal, 
monetary, and prudential policies at a quarterly frequency throughout 2020.  
Sources: Kirti et al. (2023); authors’ estimates. 
To assess whether large policies were more effective, we construct dummies for large policy 
announcements for policy types where we have consistent information on sizes .11 Figure 4 
illustrates the distributions of sizes for these policies and the threshold we use to delineate 
large policies . For both fiscal policy (above the line  measures, and loans  and contingent  
liabilities) and monetary policy  (asset purchases and rate cuts ) measures, we define large 
policies as those with sizes above the 90th percentile of announced measures observed in 
 
9 Figure 15 in Kirti et al. (2025) defines each policy used, drawing on Kirti et al. (202 3). Relative to Kirti et al. 
(2023), we separate credit facilities and market liquidity measures, and do not include measures related to 
nonbank financial institutions or market-based measures. 
10 The strong correlation of announcements across policies was also present at higher frequencies: packages 
spanning more than one policy category  represented the majority of announcements in the weeks of March 
and April 2020; see Figure 16 in the Kirti et al. (2025).  
11 For some types of policies—particularly prudential policies—it is challenging to assign sizes. Restrictions on 
dividend payments, for example, are difficult to quantify in terms of size. In these cases, we include robustness 
using the count of prudential policies as a proxy for sizes. 
58
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 12 ---
our data at the country-quarter level.12 Sizes for fiscal policies and unconventional monetary 
policy are measured relative to 2019 GDP. For conventional monetary policy, we focus on 
the size of policy rate changes relative to the level of rates at the end of 2019.13 
Figure 4: Size Distribution of Policies and Thresholds for Large Policies as a Percent of 
2019 GDP 
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of policies for which sizes are available and indicates the top 10th 
percentile threshold that we use as a cutoff to define large policies. While sizes for fiscal policy measures, credit 
guarantees, and asset purchase programs are measured relative to 2019 GDP, cuts in monetary policy interest 
rate are measured as a fraction of their level at the end of 2019. We cumulate sizes within policy to the country-
quarter level before identifying large policies. 
Sources: Kirti et al. (2023); authors’ estimates. 
To analyze the impact of policy combinations on firm financing, we obtain quarterly firm -
level data for about 6,200 firms operating in 39 countries (16 advanced and 23 emerging and 
developing countries) from S&P Capital IQ .14 Importantly, in addition to standard balance 
sheet variables like assets and debt and income statement variables like revenues, expenses, 
and net income, we also observe the quantity of debt from banks. 
 
12 In robustness tests, we vary the cutoff we use to define large policies. 
13 We treat one rate cut smaller than 50 basis points that would be classified as large relative to the level at the 
end of 2019 as small. 
14 Relative to the bank -level estimations, there are 10 fewer countries because quarterly -level firm financial 
statements are not available or the coverage of firms is very limited. 
59
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
IV. Empirical Methodology 
Bank-Level Analysis 
As we observed in Figure 3, countries tended to introduce different policies simultaneously. 
Stand-alone policy announcements are rarely observed in the data. This makes it challenging 
to isolate the impact of specific policies  on outcomes, and more appropriate to analyze the 
effect of combinations o r packages. To examine the association between  combinations of 
policy measures and credit at the bank level, we begin by estimating Equation (1): 
∆ ln(L)b,c,q =  αPc,q−1 + δCountry controls c,q + γXb,q+ βb + εb,c,q  (1) 
Where ∆ ln(𝐿)𝑏,𝑐,𝑞 is the quarter-on-quarter log change in lending by bank b in country 𝑐 
during quarter 𝑞. 𝑃𝑐,𝑞−1 is a vector of policy packages , lagged by a quarter . We term a 
combination of policies observed in the data  as a “policy package .” Policy packages might 
include only fiscal, only monetary , or only prudential policies or a comb ination of two or 
three policy types. Each policy package is defined by a  matrix of dummies equal to one for 
countries and periods where that package is announced. Using information where sizes are 
available, we also estimate a variant of Equation (1) to separately assess the effect of  
packages with large policies across all types relative to packages with only one large type of 
policy or small policies or packages in which not all types of policies are implemented.  
𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝑐,𝑞 includes indicators of health-related developments (measured by the 
prevalence of COVID-19 cases), financial stress (captured by sovereign bond spreads), the 
intensity of the economic shock (measured by quarterly revisions in IMF forecasts of GDP 
growth for the duration of the crisis), and measures of de facto mobility (based on data from 
Google).15 𝛽𝑏 represents bank-level fixed effects , and 𝑋𝑏,𝑞 are lagged bank-level 
characteristics that can affect bank lending (for example, bank size, capitalization, asset and 
liability composition).16 As we work with short time series, we cluster standard errors by 
country.  
 
15 Data for COVID-19 cases by country is from Our World in Data.  Our measure of financial stress relies on 
spreads of sovereign bond yields to US Treasuries, using the level of yields for the US , and yields on regional 
JPMorgan bond indices where country-specific yields are not available. Data on individual bond yields is from 
Bloomberg. Within each quarter, we calculate an average of the absolute and percent change in the yield spread 
from the start of the quarter to the peak. To measure the (expected) intensity of economic shock, we calculate 
the quarterly change in the forecasted sum of GDP in 2020 and 2021 relative to 2019 , relying on confidential 
IMF forecasts. The measure of mobility is an average of  the percent change in transit and workplace mobility 
indexes from Google. 
16 The inclusion of bank -fixed effects also helps control for time -invariant or sticky country characteristic s 
because bank fixed effects absorb country fixed effects in our sample . Equation (1) does not include time fixed 
effects because as shown in Figures 1 -2, credit recovered for most countries in Q2 , following the widespread 
adoption of  packages combining all three type s of policies (Figure 3), suggesting that  a quarter fixed effect 
would completely absorb this effect. In other words, the s ynchronized nature of the pandemic and the policy 
response makes it difficult to identify quarter effects separately from the effect of policies.  
 
60
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 14 ---
Notably, our empirical methodology incorporates the following features: (a) specifications 
are estimated at the bank level while policies are adopted at the country-time level; (b) policy 
combinations are lagged ; and ( c) bank fixed effects and  extensive country -time varying  
controls are included. Lagging the policy packages helps mitigate potential concerns about 
reverse causality. Moreover, if countries introduced policy packages in anticipation of poor 
subsequent outcomes, this would bias against  finding a positive effect of policy packages in 
the subsequent quarter.  As COVID-19 was a global shock that presented countries with 
highly multidimensional policy choices, alternative approaches such as  reliance on other 
countries’ choices as proxies  (including Bartik -like strategies ) or attempts to construct 
“synthetic control ” countries are difficult to justify and implement . Similarly, u sing the 
differential exposure to (or intensity of) the pandemic would not help identify the impact of 
policy packages, because the choice of package was likely driven not only by the pandemic 
but also by the space countries had for policies, and this varied significantly across countries. 
Moreover, space for policies to respond to the pandemic is unfortunately difficult to measure 
across the combinations of policies we consider. However, accounting for potential 
differences across countries in policy space would not change the sign of the bias: countries 
with space would still have chosen to use it only if they expected poor subsequent outcomes. 
We also examine differences in effectiveness of policy packages across banks with different 
characteristics (𝜔𝑏) by estimating Equation (2). Equation (2) allows us to include country x 
quarter fixed effects (𝜃𝑐,𝑞) to capture the impact of policies and macro variables as in (1), as 
well as to account  for any potentially omitted country -time level variable s that could 
influence both the policy response and the lending behavior of banks. 
∆ ln(L)b,c,q =  λPc,q−1 × ωb + ϕCountry controlsc,q × ωb +  θc,q + πb + μXb,q + νb,c,q  (2) 
In estimating Equation (2), we examine the differential response to policies for banks with 
high and low equity (based on whether banks’ equity-to-asset ratios were above or below 
within-country median levels before the pandemic) . Less-well-capitalized banks are 
relatively more constrained in their ability to lend, so we would expect policies that support 
banks’ ability to lend to have a larger impact on banks with lower levels of equity. Including 
𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝑐,𝑞 × 𝜔𝑏 allows for the  possibility that the effect of country controls on 
bank lending can also vary depending on banks’ equity levels. 𝜋𝑏 denotes bank fixed effects. 
Firm-Level Analysis 
Next, w e conduct firm -level estimations to examine the extent to which policy packages 
helped firms stay afloat  (and pay for their expenses ) via a higher level of bank borrowing 
during the pandemic, reflecting the broad objective of economic and financial policie s early 
in the crisis.  In particular, we employ firm-level data to examine the association between 
combinations of policy measures and ∆ (
𝐷
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠2019
)
𝑓,𝑐,𝑞
, the quarter-on-quarter change in bank 
debt for firm 𝑓 in country 𝑐 during quarter 𝑞, as a f raction of the firm’s pre -pandemic 
expenses, measured in 2019, in months. Expenses are calculated as total revenue minus net 
income of the firm. ∆ (
𝐷
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠2019
) 
𝑓,𝑐,𝑞
 essentially captures the extent to which firms possessed 
61
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
sufficient liquidity in the form of bank loans to cover the ir expenses during the pandemic , 
even if their expenses remained unchanged at pre-pandemic levels.  
We examine differences in effectiveness of policy packages across bank-dependent firms  
(𝜔𝑓) by estimating Equation (3): 
∆ (
D
Costs2019
)
f,c,q
=  ρPc,q−1 × ωf+ τc,q + ϑZf,q+ ψf + ϵf,c,q  (3) 
Bank-dependent firm (𝜔𝑓) is defined by an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the firm is in 
the top quartile of the fraction of bank debt to total debt within country before the pandemic. 
𝑃𝑐,𝑞−1 is the vector of policy packages, lagged by a quarter, defined as before. 𝜌 captures the 
relative effectiveness for bank-dependent firms of policy package 𝑃 in terms of the number 
of months the firm could survive with the additional liquidity provided by the policy package, 
if its expenses remained at pre -pandemic levels.  The regressions include country-
quarter (𝜏𝑐,𝑞), firm fixed effects (ψ𝑓), and time-varying firm-level controls (𝑍𝑓,𝑞).  
Finally, the firm-level analysis also allows us to trace differential effects of policy packages 
depending on firm quality. In particular, we ask whether policy packages misallocated 
resources to ex ante low-quality firms. We estimate Equation (4) to answer this question: 
∆ (
D
Costs2019
)
f,c,q
=  ιPc,q−1 × ωf+ κPc,q−1 × ωf × qf  +  ξc,q + ςXf,q+ ϖf + σf,c,q  (4) 
Where 𝑞𝑓 is defined by an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the firm is of low quality pre-
COVID-19. Low quality is  defined by the bottom quartile within country , based on four 
proxies measured by averages over  2017–19. The four proxies  include: interest coverage 
ratio, return on assets , book equity scaled by assets , and a distance to insolvency measure 
(Checo and Chen  2022). 𝜅 captures the relative effectiveness of policy package 𝑃 for low-
quality bank-dependent firms compared with that for high -quality firms. 𝜉𝑐,𝑞 are country-
quarter fixed effects, and 𝜛𝑓 are firm fixed effects. 
V. Results 
Bank-Level Results 
Figure 5 shows the results from estimating Equation (1). We begin by assessing the impact 
of packages defined by  broad policy categories: fiscal, monetary, and prudential , without 
accounting for the size of policies . The dependent variable is the quarterly growth in bank 
credit. The explanatory variables include dummies for all packages (or combination of types 
of policies) observed in the data —fiscal only; fiscal , monetary, and no prudential; fiscal, 
prudential, and no monetary; and fiscal, monetary, and prudential (which we also refer to as 
the “all-three” package). The omitted category consists of packages with no fiscal  policies 
(those where monetary and/or prudential policies were adopted) , covering only about 5% 
of country-quarters, and country-quarters with no policies, covering an additional 4% of the 
62
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 16 ---
sample. We do not explicitly study packages that we observe in very few instances 
(specifically packages without fiscal policy, for example in Japan, Mexico, and C osta Rica in 
Q3 2020; covering only 10 of the  country-quarters) and include these in the omitted 
category. In the Robustness section that follows, we discuss specifications where the omitted 
category is restricted only to country-quarters with no policies. 
All specifications include bank fixed effects. Column 1 controls for bank characteristics that 
could affect loan growth: bank size (measured by the log of assets), deposit-to-liability ratios, 
equity-to-asset ratios, and net customer loan –to-asset ratio s. Column 2  adds health 
(standard deviations of log change in COVID -19 cases per thousand) and mobility (de facto 
measures from Google) as controls. Column 3 also includes measures of economic and 
financial stress constructed based on  revisions in IMF forecasts and sovereign spreads, 
respectively. Summary statistics for the controls are includ ed in  Figure 17 in Kirti et al. 
(2025).  
  
63
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 5: Policy Packages and Bank Credit , Q1 2020–Q1 2021 
 Log Change in Credit (bps) 
 (1) (2) (3) 
Fiscal Only 423.7*** 
(125.5) 
403.3** 
(172.8) 
212.1 
(224.0) 
    
Fiscal & Monetary Only 317.8 
(212.6) 
271.1 
(257.0) 
137.2 
(289.7) 
    
Fiscal & Prudential Only 555.0*** 
(114.8) 
496.8*** 
(152.3) 
335.7 
(239.1) 
    
Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential 
487.8*** 
(84.7) 
417.5*** 
(140.9) 
299.3 
(185.5) 
Bank FEs Y Y Y 
Bank Controls Y Y Y 
Health Controls N Y Y 
De Facto Mobility Controls N Y Y 
Macro Controls N N Y 
Financial Stress Controls N N Y 
R2 0.45 0.45 0.46 
Bank-Quarters 7,480 7,480 7,480 
Banks 1,496 1,496 1,496 
Countries 49 49 49 
Notes: This table shows regressions at the bank -quarter level where the dependent variable is the log change 
in net customer loans in basis points ( quarter-over-quarter log change x 10 ,000), winsorized at the fifth and 
95th percentiles by quarter. Regressions use data for Q1 2020—Q1 2021 for a sample of 49 countries for which 
data are available for at least five banks covering either 60% of assets reported in annual data or $100  billion 
in assets and control variables are available. The main independent variables are lagged dummies identifying 
combinations of policies  into mutually exclusive packages (fiscal policy announcements without 
announcements of monetary or prudential policies, fiscal and monetary policy announcements without 
announcements of prudential policies, fiscal and prudential policy announcements witho ut announcements of 
monetary policies, and announcements of all three types of policies together). The omitted category of policy 
packages includes cases of no policy interventions along with cases where either monetary or prudential 
policies were adopted independently or jointly. The omitted category captures 9% of the policy packages in the 
sample. All specifications include the following lagged bank characteristic as controls: log of assets, deposit-to-
liability ratio, equity -to-asset ratio, and net cust omer loan –to-asset ratio, winsorized at the fifth and 95th 
percentiles by quarter. The second column also controls for cumulative COVID -19 cases per million and 
mobility (using an average of workplace and public transit indices from Google). The third column also controls 
for quarterly revisions in IMF GDP forecasts and a sovereign spread –based proxy for financial stress. All 
specifications include bank fixed effects (FEs). Standard errors clustered by country are shown in parentheses. 
The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. 
Sources: Bloomberg; Google; IMF; Kirti et al. (2023); S&P Capital IQ Pro; Our World in Data; authors’ estimates. 
We find that announcements of packages that included fiscal, monetary, and prudential 
policies had a positive impact on bank lending  (Figure 5). The degree of statistical 
significance for the estimated coefficient on the all-three package, however, is reduced when 
we include economic and financial controls . Based on Column 3, i n the quarter following 
announcements of these policies , loan growth was approximately 300 bps higher per 
quarter, but the effect is statistically indistinguishable from zero.  
64
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 18 ---
Figure 6: Size of Policy Packages and Bank Credit, Q1 2020–Q1 2021 
 Log Change in Credit (bps) 
 (1) (2) (3) 
Fiscal Only–Other 339.8*** 
(122.1) 
339.6* 
(180.0) 
28.3 
(173.7) 
    Fiscal & Monetary Only–Other 280.5 
(205.3) 
270.2 
(266.6) 
24.3 
(247.5) 
    Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Other 
487.1*** 
(110.2) 
474.2*** 
(169.2) 
160.7 
(181.2) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Other 
371.0*** 
(105.5) 
355.1** 
(169.6) 
121.2 
(161.4) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Large 
888.0*** 
(125.8) 
865.2*** 
(225.5) 
724.2*** 
(226.5) 
Bank FEs Y Y Y 
Bank Controls Y Y Y 
Health Controls N Y Y 
De Facto Mobility Controls N Y Y 
Macro Controls N N Y 
Financial Stress Controls N N Y 
R2 0.49 0.49 0.51 
Bank-Quarters 7,480 7,480 7,480 
Banks 1,496 1,496 1,496 
Countries 49 49 49 
 
Notes: This table shows regressions at the bank-quarter level where the main independent variables are lagged 
dummies for mutually exclusive packages where each package is separated into packages that do contain at 
least one large element on all dimensions where sizes can be measured well (that is, fiscal and monetary 
policies) and those that do not. Large elements of packages are defined as those in the top decile. Packages that 
are not included in the estimations as regressors (for example, packages with large fiscal policies only, those 
with large fiscal and monetary only, and those with large fiscal and prudential only) are not observed among 
the combinations adopted by countries in our sample. The omitted category includes packages with no policy 
interventions along with cases with no fiscal policies (where either monetary or prudential policies are adopted 
independently or jointly). The omitted category captur es 9 % of the policy packages in the sample. All 
specifications include the following lagged bank characteristic as controls: log of assets, deposit -to-liability 
ratio, equity-to-asset ratio, and net customer loan –to-asset ratio, winsorized at the fifth and  95th percentiles 
by quarter. The second column also controls for cumulative COVID-19 cases per million and mobility (using an 
average of workplace and public transit indices from Google). The third column adds controls for quarterly 
revisions in IMF GDP f orecasts and a sovereign spread –based proxy for financial stress. All specifications 
include bank fixed effects (FEs). Standard errors clustered by country are shown in parentheses. The symbols 
*, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. 
Sources: Bloomberg; Google; IMF; Kirti et al. (2023); S&P Capital IQ Pro; Our World in Data; authors’ estimates. 
In Figure 6, we examine nonlinearities in the effectiveness of packages in enhancing bank 
credit, based on whether the packages were large in size (a large package is defined as one 
where at least one granular policy within each subgroup of fiscal and mone tary policies is  
65
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 19 ---
large). As discussed in Section III, in the baseline, a granular policy is defined as large if its 
size lies in the top decile in the sample.17 
We find that large-size packages with combinations of all three measures—fiscal, monetary, 
and prudential—were effective in enhancing bank credit. Based on Column 3, the estimated 
magnitude on all-three-large, or the “all-out” package, is statistically significant at the 1 % 
level. Loan growth was about 700 bps higher in the quarter following announcements of a 
large package that included fiscal, monetary, and prudential policies. To put the result in 
context, note that in 2019, average quarterly loan growth in our sample was 200 bps per 
quarter, with a standard deviati on of 400 bps. The “all-out” policy package, therefore, lifted 
loan growth by more than their pre-pandemic average and standard deviation. 
Figure 7: Size Difference in Effects between “All-Out” Packages and Other Packages, Q1 
2020–Q1 2021 
Notes: This figure shows the estimated difference between the effect of credit growth from the final package in 
the third column of Figure 6 (the “all-out” package) relative to all other packages included in the specification.  
Sources: Kirti et al. 2023; S&P Capital IQ Pro; authors’ estimates. 
Was the “all -three-large” package more effective than other packages? To answer this 
question, Figure 7 reports results from statistical tests of differences between the “ all-out” 
and other packages. 18 It turns out that the “ all-out” package is indeed statistically different 
from all the other packages; the differences are economically significant too. For example, 
 
17 Size is defined as a percent of GDP wherever applicable. Large interest rate changes are calculated by taking 
the top quartile of changes relative to the initial level for the country.  Though i nformation on the size of 
prudential policies is not available , the number of policies is used as a proxy in some estimations (see Figure 
18 in Kirti et al. (2025)). 
18 We obtain similar results from estimations that do not include any controls. Se e Figure 19 in Kirti et al. 
(2025). In unreported results, we also explore and find no statistically distinguishable differences in the effects 
for advanced economies and developing countries. 
66
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 20 ---
the “all-out” package is associated with 600 -bp higher loan growth than small packages —
when neither monetary or fiscal was large, or when only one of them was of large size.  
Figure 8 further unpacks the “Fiscal & Monetary & Prudential–Other” category in Figure 6  
into two more granular buckets: first , where either fiscal or monetary was large in size 
(“Fiscal & Monetary & Prudential–Fiscal or Monetary Large”), and second, where neither was 
large (Fiscal & Monetary & Prudential–Other”). Here, we can isolate the impact of small 
packages, where neither pol icy is of large size. We find small -size packages to have had a 
statistically insignificant effect in raising credit, while packages where either monetary or 
fiscal was large to be relatively more effective, though the effect was only one-third that of 
the “all-out” package. Importantly, the  “all-out” package continue d to be most effective —
both statistically and economically—in raising bank credit. 
  
67
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 8: Size and Scope of Policy Packages and Bank Credit, Q1 2020–Q1 2021 
 (1) (2) (3) 
Fiscal Only–Other 340.7*** 
(121.4) 
342.9* 
(179.3) 
30.6 
(172.1) 
    Fiscal & Monetary Only–Other 280.1 
(206.1) 
272.0 
(267.3) 
24.0 
(247.2) 
    Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Other 
497.4*** 
(108.4) 
487.2*** 
(169.7) 
171.1 
(181.2) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Other 
361.6*** 
(108.0) 
348.4** 
(170.3) 
111.8 
(160.2) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Fiscal or Monetary 
Large 
517.8*** 
(83.1) 
505.2*** 
(170.3) 
277.0 
(176.0) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Fiscal & Monetary 
Large 
884.8*** 
(125.7) 
864.9*** 
(224.9) 
723.0*** 
(225.6) 
Bank FEs Y Y Y 
Bank Controls Y Y Y 
Health Controls N Y Y 
De Facto Mobility Controls N Y Y 
Macro Controls N N Y 
Financial Stress Controls N N Y 
R2 0.49 0.49 0.52 
Bank- Quarters 7,480 7,480 7,480 
Banks 1,496 1,496 1,496 
Countries 49 49 49 
Notes: This table shows regressions at the bank-quarter level where the main independent variables are lagged 
dummies for mutually exclusive packages of policies where each package is separated into packages that 
contain at least one large element on all dimensions wh ere sizes can be measured well ( that is , fiscal and 
monetary policies), packages that contain one large element on only one dimension, and packages with no large 
elements. Packages that are not included in the estimations as regressors ( for example, packages with large 
fiscal policies only, those with large fiscal and monetary only, and those with large fiscal and prudential only) 
are not observed among the combinations adopted by countries in our sample. The omitted category includes 
packages with no polic y interventions along with cases with no fiscal policy (where either monetary or 
prudential policies were adopted independently or jointly). All specifications include the following lagged bank 
characteristic as controls: log of assets, deposit -to-liability ratio, equity-to-asset ratio, and net customer loan –
to-asset ratio, winsorized at the fifth and 95th percentiles by quarter. The second column also controls for 
cumulative COVID-19 cases per million and mobility (using an average of workplace and public transit indices 
from Google). The third column adds controls for quarterly revisions in IMF GDP forecasts and a sovereign 
spread–based proxy for financial stress. All specifications include bank fixed effects. Standard errors clustered 
by country are shown in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 %, 5%, 
and 1% level, respectively. 
Sources: Bloomberg; Google; IMF; Kirti et al. (2023); S&P Capital IQ Pro; Our World in Data; authors’ estimates. 
While Figures 6 and 8 establish the importance of the “all-out” packages in enhancing credit, 
they do not isolate the effects of several other large packages (for example, a package with 
only large-size fiscal policies ), which are rarely observed in the data. Figure 9 relaxes the 
definition of a “large” package, and considers it large if its size lies in the top quartile, tercile, 
68
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 22 ---
and median in the sample (columns 2, 3, and 4 respectively), rather than using the decile as 
the cutoff as in Figures 6 and 8 . This allows  us to distinguish the effects of the ”all-out” 
package from other combinations  of large -size policies .19 The findings suggest that  the 
combination of large monetary policies and large fiscal relaxations with prudential measures 
was the most successful package in boosting credit by banks. Loan growth was  at least 450 
bps higher in the quarter following announcements of a large package that included large 
changes in monetary policies  combined with large fiscal and prudential policies.  The 
estimated effect iveness of the “all-out” package in enhancing credit is statistically and 
economically higher than the effect of other large packages (that is, four times the effect of a 
large fiscal -only package ).20 Overall, the results further support our main finding  that 
countries that introduced “all-out” packages—both in terms of breadth and intensity of 
policies—saw the biggest increases in credit growth following the COVID-19 shock. 
  
 
19 Figure 20 in Kirti et al. (2025) reports the number of country-quarters in each of the granular buckets for 
different thresholds used in defining a large-size package.  
20 Figure 21 in Kirti et al. (2025) reports results from tests of statistical differences between “all-out” and other 
packages. 
69
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 9: Size of Policy Packages (Varying Definitions across Columns) and Bank 
Credit, Q1 2020–Q1 2021 
 Decile Quartile Tercile Median 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) 
Fiscal Only–Other 28.3 
(173.7) 
70.7 
(174.0) 
86.1 
(178.3) 
186.2 
(211.4) 
     Fiscal Only–Large  –139.1 
(179.3) 
48.6 
(202.7) 
211.1 
(226.8) 
     Fiscal & Monetary Only–Other 24.3 
(247.5) 
43.1 
(252.6) 
67.7 
(269.9) 
123.0 
(316.3) 
     Fiscal & Monetary Only–Large   39.8 
(157.3) 
257.7 
(249.2) 
     Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Other 
160.7 
(181.2) 
214.6 
(191.1) 
266.0 
(194.0) 
338.1 
(250.0) 
     Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Large 
 61.9 
(383.3) 
140.7 
(304.9) 
375.3 
(267.2) 
     Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Other 
121.2 
(161.4) 
121.6 
(160.5) 
130.2 
(162.4) 
210.3 
(173.4) 
     Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Fiscal & Monetary 
Large 
724.2*** 
(226.5) 
696.4*** 
(229.3) 
667.0*** 
(233.8) 
444.6** 
(219.7) 
Bank FEs Y Y Y Y 
Bank Controls Y Y Y Y 
Health Controls Y Y Y Y 
De Facto Mobility Controls Y Y Y Y 
Macro Controls Y Y Y Y 
Financial Stress Controls Y Y Y Y 
R2 0.51 0.51 0.51 0.48 
Bank Quarters 7,480 7,480 7,480 7,480 
Banks 1,496 1,496 1,496 1,496 
Countries 49 49 49 49 
Notes: This table shows regressions at the bank -quarter level where the main independent variables are 
dummies for mutually exclusive packages of policies separated into packages that contain at least one large 
element on all dimensions where sizes can be measured well ( that is, fiscal and monetary policies) and those 
that do not. Large elements of packages are those r espectively in the top decile, quartile, tercile, or half of the 
distribution in columns 1–4. Packages that are not included in the estimations as regressors ( for example , 
packages with large fiscal policies only , those with large fiscal and monetary only,  and those with large fiscal 
and prudential only) are not observed among the combinations adopted by countries in our sample. The 
omitted category includes packages with no policy interventions along with cases with no fiscal policy (where 
either monetary or prudential policies were adopted independently or jointly). All specifications include the 
following lagged bank characteristic as controls: log of assets, deposit -to-liability ratio, equity -to-asset ratio, 
and net customer loan –to-asset ratio, winsoriz ed at the fifth and 95th percentiles by quarter. Moreover, 
controls for cumulative COVID-19 cases per million, mobility (using an average of workplace and public transit 
indices from Google), quarterly revisions in IMF GDP forecasts , and a sovereign spread –based proxy for 
financial stress, along with bank fixed effects (FEs), are also included. Standard errors clustered by country are 
shown in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 %, 5%, and 1% level, 
respectively. 
Sources: Bloomberg; Google; IMF; Kirti et al. (2023); S&P Capital IQ Pro; Our World in Data; authors’ estimates .
70
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 24 ---
The next natural question to ask is which granular policy measures were more prevalent in 
“all-out” packages . We find that the all -three-large combinations were mostly unique; for 
example, among all 39 country-quarters with above median size of large fiscal and monetary 
policies, each granular combination of 27 policies occurred only once. That said, we do find 
that some granular policies were used more frequently than others (Figure 10). For example, 
grants were the most common fiscal measure, used in all successful packages, compared with 
only 60 % of the time in other packages. In contrast, equity injections we re the least 
prevalent. Within monetary policies, credit facilities, asset purchases, and policy rates were 
frequently used, whereas foreign exchange interventions and reserve requirements were 
less common. Finally, among prudential policies, relaxation of  capital requirements, 
supervisory expectations, and reporting requirements were pervasive, whereas changes to 
guidance on underwriting were used less. Importantly, each of the 27 granular policy tools 
was more prevalent in successful packages, compared to  their frequency in other packages 
(Figure 10), confirming our main finding of the effectiveness of “all-out” combinations at the 
most granular level. 
  
71
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 25 ---
Figure 10: Granular Composition of Large and Other Packages, Q1 2020–Q4 2020 
Panel A: Fiscal Policies Panel B: Monetary Policies 
Panel C: Prudential Policies 
 
 
Notes: This figure shows the prevalence of the individual granular policies across policy packages separated 
into two groups: (a) large packages with components with above median sizes (as in column 4 of Figure 9) that 
contained at least one large element on all dimensions where sizes can be measured well ( that is, fiscal and 
monetary policies) including all three types of policies and (b) all other packages. Reserve requirements (LCU) 
apply to local currency liabilities. Reserve requirements (FX) apply to liabilities in other currencies.  
Source: Kirti et al. (2023). 
Robustness 
The baseline results presented in Figures 6–9 are robust to (a) dropping country -bank-
quarters with packages that do not contain any fiscal policies (Figure 22), (b) adding lagged 
credit growth as an explanatory variable to control for base effects (Figure 23), (c) using an 
alternative definition of large monetar y policies (Figure 24), (d) including large prudential 
policies using counts to define “large” (Figure 18), (e) using fewer controls than those 
72
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 26 ---
included in the baseline Figure 6 (Figure 25), and (f) controlling for forecast dispersion as a 
measure of uncertainty (unreported results).  
We report robustness results in Kirti et al. (2025) . Specifically, Figure 22 shows that when 
the same policy packages as those in Figure 6 are compared to a counterfactual of no policies 
(instead of including the infrequently employed policy combinations not shown in Figure 6 
in the counterfactual), the main finding that large packages, combining fiscal, monetary, and 
prudential policies, were the most significant in driving bank loan growth remains. Similarly, 
Figure 23 confirms that our results survive once we control for base effects  related to past 
credit growth. In Figure 24, instead of defining large monetary policy actions relative to their 
2019 levels, we present results considering the absolute change in interest rates and confirm 
that our main finding prevails. Because it is difficult to  measure the size of prud ential 
policies, in Figure 18, we consider as a proxy the number of prudential policy actions. Our 
main results do not change in this case either.  Neither do they change if we include fewer 
controls as in Figure 25. 
Bank Heterogeneity 
The impact of policies adopted in response to COVID-19 on bank lending could vary 
depending on bank characteristics. In particular,  low capitalization could constrain banks’ 
ability to lend and hence could affect their response to policies . We explore bank 
heterogeneity by estimating Equation (2). The inclusion of bank- and country-quarter fixed 
effects also allows us to better isolate the impact of policies on bank lending.  Moreover, 
country-quarter fixed effects enable us to control for demand factors  to some extent and 
interpret our results as driven by supply-side factors such banks’ capitalization . Figure 11 
reports the results . Large-size p ackages that combined all three types of  policies drove 
stronger credit growth at less -well-capitalized banks.  In column 3 , w e find that  “all-out” 
packages were relatively more effective for low-capital banks, with estimated loan grow th 
approximately 100 bps larger for less-well-capitalized banks. Overall, these findings support 
the interpretation that packages that included fiscal, monetary, and prudential policies—and 
in particular all-three-large packages—were most effective in raising lending by banks that 
were more constrained in their ability to lend due to lower levels of equity.  
  
73
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 11: Differential Effects of Policy Packages across Banks with Varying Capital 
Levels, Q1 2020–Q1 2021 
 (1) (2) (3) 
       Fiscal Only–Other x Low E/A 0.1 
(49.6) 
26.9 
(55.8) 
9.4 
(71.4) 
    Fiscal & Monetary only–Other x 
Low E/A 
55.4 
(47.5) 
77.6 
(64.3) 
72.9 
(47.9) 
    Fiscal & Prudential only–Other x 
Low E/A 
17.2 
(63.1) 
44.6 
(78.0) 
42.7 
(76.2) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & Prudential–
Other x Low E/A 
56.4* 
(33.5) 
84.3 
(55.2) 
82.2* 
(45.2) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & Prudential–
Large x Low E/A 
81.4*** 
(22.2) 
105.3* 
(54.3) 
98.1** 
(46.9) 
Country x Quarter FEs Y Y Y 
Bank FEs Y Y Y 
Bank Controls Y Y Y 
Health Controls N Y Y 
De Facto Mobility Controls N Y Y 
Macro Controls N N Y 
Financial Stress Controls N N Y 
R2 0.71 0.71 0.71 
Bank-Quarters 7,480 7,480 7,480 
Banks 1,496 1,496 1,496 
Countries 49 49 49 
Notes: This table shows regressions at the bank -quarter level where the main independent variables are 
package dummies accounting for sizes (as in Figure 6) interacted with dummies identifying capital-constrained 
banks (banks with 2019 equity-to-asset [E/A] ratios below within-country median). Specifications control for 
interactions of the low-capital dummy with cumulative COVID-19 cases per million, mobility (using an average 
of workplace and public transit indices from Google), quarterly revisions in IMF GDP forecasts, and a sovereign 
spread–based proxy for financial stress. Specifications include lagged controls for log of assets, deposit -to-
liability ratio, E/A ratio, and net customer loan –to-asset ratio, winsorized at the fifth and 95th percentiles by 
quarter and bank and country x quarter fixed effects  (FEs). Standard errors clustered by country are in 
parentheses. The symbols  *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % level, 
respectively. 
Sources: Bloomberg; Google; IMF; Kirti et al. (2023); S&P Capital IQ Pro; Our World in Data; authors’ estimates. 
Policymaking in the Context of Uncertainty 
Deep uncertainty was a key feature of the shock. Because the shock was exceptional and 
uncertainty large—both on the effects of policies and the channels through which lending 
could be stimulated—a mix of policies with the potential to work through different channels 
could be expected to be the most effective. We provide some suggestive evidence on this by 
exploring the interaction between all-out packages with uncertainty , accounting for the 
interaction between uncertainty and all other policy packages.  
We measure uncertainty by disagreement among consensus forecasters on the impact of the 
pandemic and the path of future economic output. The sample is smaller based on 
74
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 28 ---
availability of consensus forecasts, yet their use helps provide some evidence on the role of 
uncertainty in shaping the effectiveness of packages. The results are reported in Figure 12. 
Indeed, we find suggestive evidence for the effects of the all-out package on bank lending to 
be higher when forecast uncertainty is high. The interaction between forecast uncertainty 
and the all-out package is posi tive and statistically distinguishable at the 10 % level. The 
estimated magnitudes imply that  bank lending was 750 bp s higher for percentage point 
increase in the standard deviation of output forecasts compared to the average. 
Figure 12 : Differential Effect s of Policy Packages across Economies with Varying 
Forecast Dispersion, Q1 2020–Q1 2021 
 No 
Interaction 
(Decile) 
 
 
Decile 
 
 
Quartile 
 
 
Tercile 
 
 
Median 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Fiscal Only–Other 308.7 
(264.2) 
50.1 
(223.9) 
166.6 
(226.6) 
167.9 
(223.4) 
99.7 
(221.6) 
      Fiscal Only–Large 336.5 
(303.3) 
 949.1 
(1,116.8) 
966.2 
(1,127.3) 
243.5 
(239.3) 
      Fiscal & Monetary Only–
Other 
167.7 
(385.2) 
123.5 
(292.3) 
155.0 
(306.8) 
173.3 
(318.7) 
160.4 
(314.8) 
      Fiscal & Monetary Only–
Large 
406.2 
(293.2) 
  –151.1 
(199.5) 
272.4 
(225.8) 
      Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Other 
404.8 
(298.1) 
228.6 
(209.6) 
247.5 
(211.7) 
261.7 
(212.9) 
184.2 
(223.5) 
      Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Large 
398.6 
(308.3) 
 218.3 
(218.7) 
128.9 
(238.8) 
175.5 
(247.5) 
      Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Other 
252.1 
(223.3) 
225.5 
(184.7) 
240.7 
(194.4) 
241.8 
(195.4) 
275.8 
(190.1) 
      Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Large 
473.9* 
(259.8) 
266.1 
(165.6) 
314.3 
(197.8) 
343.1 
(219.9) 
249.3 
(197.1) 
      Fiscal Only–Other x 
Interaction 
 
 
345.0 
(392.9) 
540.7 
(526.3) 
541.8 
(528.7) 
532.0 
(513.4) 
      Fiscal Only–Large x 
Interaction 
 
 
   263.0 
(321.2) 
      Fiscal & Monetary Only–
Other x Interaction 
 
 
467.2 
(351.8) 
543.0 
(385.2) 
543.1 
(387.2) 
663.7 
(396.2) 
      Fiscal & Monetary Only–
Large x Interaction 
 
 
   333.9 
(395.7) 
      Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Other x Interaction 
 
 
346.7 
(333.9) 
355.2 
(325.8) 
355.5 
(331.4) 
425.5 
(321.4) 
      Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Large x Interaction 
 
 
 –662.1 
(431.1) 
–351.3 
(433.9) 
–103.4 
(450.2) 
      Fiscal & Monetary &  516.0 589.2 599.1 620.8 
75
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 29 ---
Prudential–Other x 
Interaction 
 (379.1) (419.3) (422.7) (417.4) 
      Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Large x 
Interaction 
 
 
676.7* 
(377.2) 
719.0* 
(412.8) 
697.9* 
(411.1) 
744.6* 
(398.3) 
      Forecast Dispersion  
 
–392.0 
(378.6) 
–468.1 
(415.4) 
–470.6 
(418.8) 
–492.1 
(409.2) 
Bank FEs Y Y Y Y Y 
Bank Controls Y Y Y Y Y 
Health Controls Y Y Y Y Y 
De Facto Mobility Controls Y Y Y Y Y 
Macro Controls Y Y Y Y Y 
Financial Stress Control Y Y Y Y Y 
Forecast Dispersion 
Controls 
N Y Y Y Y 
R2 0.49 0.56 0.56 0.55 0.55 
Bank-Quarters 6,960 6,960 6,960 6,960 6,960 
Banks 1,392 1,392 1,392 1,392 1,392 
Countries 40 40 40 40 40 
Notes: This table shows regressions at the bank -quarter level where the main independent variables are 
package dummies for mutually exclusive packages of policies separated into packages that do contain at least 
one large element on all dimensions where si zes can be measured well ( that is, fiscal and monetary policies) 
and those that do not, interacted with forecast dispersion (quarterly change in the sum of the standard 
deviations of GDP forecasts for one- and two-year horizons). Large elements of packages  are defined as those 
respectively in the top decile, quartile, tercile, or half of the distribution in column s 2–5. Packages that are not 
included in the estimations ( for example, with large fiscal policies only , with large fiscal and monetary only, 
and w ith large fiscal and prudential only) are not observed in our sample. The omitted category includes 
packages with no policy interventions and cases with no fiscal policy ( that is, either monetary or prudential 
policies were adopted independently or jointly). All specifications include as controls: log of assets, deposit-to-
liability ratio, equity -to-asset ratio, and net customer loan –to-asset ratio, winsorized at the fifth and 95th 
percentiles by quarter. Controls for cumulative COVID -19 cases per million, mobility (from Google), quarterly 
revisions in IMF GDP forecasts, a sovereign spread –based proxy for financial stress, and forecast dispersion, 
along with bank fixed effects  (FEs) are also included. Standard errors clustered by country are shown in 
parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % level, 
respectively. 
Sources: Bloomberg; Google; IMF; Kirti et al. (2023); S&P Capital IQ Pro; Our World in Data; authors’ estimates. 
Firm-Level Results 
The objectives of th e firm-level analysis are to examine (a) which policy packages allowed 
firms to maintain sufficient liquidity (by raising bank credit) to meet their expenses and (b) 
the extent to which the impact of policies on liquidity was larger for low-quality firms, and 
hence suggestive  of misallocation . Figure 13  reports firm -level results  from estimating 
Equation (3). Column 3 reports the results for relative effectiveness of large -size packages 
for bank-dependent firms with controls corresponding to our most granular specifications 
at the bank level —but all interacted with a dummy identifying bank -dependent firms. The 
results suggest that announcements of “all-out” packages were relatively more effective for 
bank-dependent firms. The magnitude of the estimated coefficient on “Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Large x Bank Dependent” in column 3 suggests that the “ all-out” package 
76
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 30 ---
provided enough extra liquidity for a firm to survive two additional months relative to non-
bank-dependent firms, assuming its expenses did not change from pre-pandemic levels. 
Figure 13 : Differential Effects of Policy Packages on Liquidity for Bank-Dependent 
Firms, Q1 2020–Q1 2021 
 (1) (2) (3) 
Fiscal Only—Other x Bank 
Dependent 
2.2* 
(1.3) 
2.0 
(1.3) 
1.4 
(1.4) 
    Fiscal & Monetary Only–Other 
x Bank Dependent 
1.2** 
(0.5) 
0.8 
(0.9) 
0.3 
(0.6) 
    Fiscal & Prudential Only–
Other x Bank Dependent 
2.1*** 
(0.6) 
1.7 
(1.1) 
1.1 
(1.0) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Other x Bank 
Dependent 
1.9*** 
(0.5) 
1.4 
(0.9) 
1.0 
(0.7) 
    Fiscal & Monetary & 
Prudential–Large x Bank 
Dependent 
2.8*** 
(0.9) 
2.4* 
(1.2) 
2.1* 
(1.1) 
Firm FEs Y Y Y 
Country x Quarter FEs Y Y Y 
Health Controls N Y Y 
De Facto Mobility Controls N N Y 
Macro Controls N N Y 
Financial Stress Controls N N Y 
Firm Controls Y Y Y 
R2 0.21 0.21 0.21 
Firm-Quarters 31,035 31,035 31,035 
Firm 6,207 6,207 6,207 
Countries 39 39 39 
Notes: This table shows regressions at the firm -quarter level where the dependent variable is additional 
liquidity (the quarter-over-quarter change in bank debt scaled by 2019 expenses in months). The main 
independent variables are package dummies accounti ng for sizes (as in Figure 6), interacted with dummies 
identifying bank-dependent firms (firms with the fraction of bank debt as of end 2019 in the top quartile within 
country). Specifications control for interactions of the bank -dependent dummy with cumul ative COVID -19 
cases per million, mobility (average of workplace and public transit indices from Google), quarterly revisions 
in IMF GDP forecasts, and a sovereign spread –based proxy for financial stress. All specifications control for 
lagged log firm-level revenue growth and include firm and country x quarter fixed effects (FEs). Standard errors 
clustered by country are shown in parentheses.  The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.  
Sources: Bloomberg; Google; IMF; Kirti et al. (2023); S&P Capital IQ Pro; Our World in Data; authors’ estimates. 
Last, we explore whether “all-out” policy packages misallocated resources to ex  ante low-
quality firms . Figure 14 reports the res ults for estimating Equation (4). The dependent 
variable is the quarter-on-quarter change in bank debt, as a fraction of the firm’s pre -
pandemic expenses. Columns 1–4 report the results with the four proxies for firm quality—
interest coverage ratio, return on assets, book equity scaled by assets, and distance to 
insolvency—respectively. Strikingly, in all four specifications , with distinct proxies for 
quality, t he estimated coefficients on the triple interaction among “Fiscal & Monetary & 
77
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 31 ---
Prudential–Large x Bank Dependent x Low  Firm Quality” are statistically indis tinguishable 
from zero. In other words, the re is little evidence that , on average, the additional liquidity 
from the “all-out” policy packages differentially affected low- and high-quality firms.21 
Figure 14: Differential Effects of Policy Packages on Liquidity for Poor-Quality Bank-
Dependent Firms, Q1 2020–Q1 2021 
 ICR ROA E/A DI 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) 
Fiscal & Monetary & Prudential 
– Large x Bank Dependent 
2.1* 
(1.2) 
2.2* 
(1.1) 
2.3* 
(1.2) 
1.3 
(0.9) 
     Fiscal & Monetary & Prudential 
– Large x Low Firm Quality  
–0.3 
(1.0) 
0.3 
(1.0) 
0.6 
(0.7) 
–0.4 
(0.4) 
     Fiscal & Monetary & Prudential 
– Large x Bank Dependent x 
Low Firm Quality  
–0.2 
(0.7) 
–0.5 
(0.7) 
–1.0 
(0.9) 
0.2 
(0.5) 
Firm FEs Y Y Y Y 
Country x Quarter FEs Y Y Y Y 
Health Controls Y Y Y Y 
De facto Mobility Controls Y Y Y Y 
Macro Controls Y Y Y Y 
Financial Stress Controls Y Y Y Y 
Firm Controls Y Y Y Y 
Other Packages and 
Interactions 
Y Y Y Y 
R2 0.22 0.21 0.21 0.21 
Firm-Quarters 30,675 31,035 31,030 29,715 
Firm 6,135 6,207 6,206 5,943 
Countries 39 39 39 39 
Notes: This table shows regressions at the firm-quarter level where specifications replicate the third column of 
Figure 13  introducing an additional dimension of firm -level heterogeneity: a proxy for pre -COVID-19 firm 
quality. For each proxy for firm quality, we include all interactions between packages and bank dependence 
shown in the third column of Figure 13, interactions between packages and the proxy for firm quality, and triple 
interactions between packages, bank dependence, and firm quality. The prox ies for pre-Covid-19 quality are 
(a) interest coverage ratio (ICFR), (b) return on assets (ROA), (c) book equity scaled by assets (equity-to assets 
ratio (E/A), and (d) a distance to insolvency  (DI) measure. For each proxy , we use a dummy for firms in the 
bottom quartile within country based on the average indicator for 2017 –19. Standard errors clustered by 
country are shown in parentheses. The symbols *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 
1% level, respectively. 
Sources: Bloomberg; Google; IMF; Kirti et al. (2023); S&P Capital IQ Pro; Our World in Data; authors’ estimates. 
  
 
21 A caveat is that the sample of firms included in our analysis likely excludes small firms, which may have been 
disproportionately affected. The results, moreover, cannot rule out any misallocation stemming from the 
extensive margin, or access to new programs (Granja et al. 2022; Huneeus et al. 2022). 
78
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 32 ---
VI. Conclusions 
We analyze the impact on bank lending of different combinations of policies enacted during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Whether and how the composition and size of policy packages 
matter for the impact on bank lending  in the context of deep uncertainty  is not clear. To 
examine this empirically, we assemble a granular dataset of fiscal, monetary, and prudential 
policy announcements for a wide sample of advanced and emerging and developing 
economies. We examine the impact of both the announcement of different policy packages 
as well as their sizes.  In addition, we explore heterogeneity across banks  in the impact of 
policy combinations as well as the impact on liquidity for nonfinancial firms. 
Our analysis shows that loan growth was faster for banks in countries that announced large-
size packages combining fiscal, monetary, and prudential measures (“all-out” packages)  
relative to those that relied on some , but not all , of these three types of policies  or where 
packages were not large . Across banks, the impact of policies was larger among banks that 
were a priori more constrained because of low capital levels.  
Consistent with our evidence at the bank  level, large packages combining fiscal, monetary, 
and prudential measures helped chan nel additional liquidity to bank -dependent firms. 
Within bank -dependent firms, we do not find that policy packages disproportionately 
benefited firms with poor pre-COVID-19 performance. 
The results suggest that decisive action in terms of breadth and intensity of policies following 
the COVID-19 shock may have been important in the recovery of bank lending , particularly 
given that the shock was unprecedented and uncertainty so large. Indeed, we find suggestive 
evidence for the effects of the “all-out” package on bank lending to be relatively larger when 
forecast uncertainty is higher. 
In future crises combining negative supply and demand shocks with significant uncertainty, 
a similarly concerted, coordinated, “all-out” approach may have an important role to play in 
supporting the economy.  Although COVID-19 was an unusual shock in many ways, further 
global shocks—including wars and other geopolitical shifts—are not hard to conceive. 
While this paper highlights the benefits of an “all-out” approach in response to a global shock 
such as COVID-19, not all countries could or will be able to respond in such an aggressive 
fashion. Bergant and Forbes (2023) shows that the size of countries’ response to COVID-19 
was largely driven by the policy space before the pandemic. Hence, emerging and developing 
countries have been and will likely be more constrained. It is also important to recognize 
that there are costs and unintended consequences from an “ all-out” approach. Large fiscal 
and monetary packages may also lead to inflationary pressures  and concerns about debt 
sustainability. How to calibrate the appropriate “all-out” response to minimize the costs and 
unintended consequences is beyond the scope of this paper and merits further research.  
79
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 33 ---
VII. References  
Acharya, Viral V., and S ascha Steffen . 2020. “The Risk of Being a Fallen Angel and the 
Corporate Dash for Cash in the Midst of C OVID.” Review of Corporate Finance Studies  9, no. 
3): 430–71.   
https://doi.org/10.1093/rcfs/cfaa013 
Acosta-Henao, Miguel, A ndrés Fernández, Pa tricia Gomez-Gonzales, and Şebnem Kalemli-
Özcan. 2023. “The COVID-19 Shock and Firm Financing: Government or Market? Or Both? ” 
Fordham University Department of Economics Discussion Paper No. 2023/03, June 2023.  
https://archive.fordham.edu/ECONOMICS_RESEARCH/PAPERS/dp2023_03_gomezgonzale
z.pdf 
Alfaro, Laura, Anusha Chari, Andrew N. Greenland, and Peter K. Schott. 2020. “Aggregate and 
Firm-Level Stock Returns during Pandemics, in Real Time.” NBER Working Paper No. 26950, 
May 2020.   
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26950 
Altavilla, Carlo, Francesca Barbiero, Miguel Boucinha, and Lorenzo Burlon. 2023. “The Great 
Lockdown: Pandemic Response Policies and Bank Lending Conditions. ” European Economic 
Review 156 (July): 104478.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2023.104478 
Altavilla, Carlo, Andrew Ellul, Marco Pagano, Andrea Polo, and Thomas Vlassopoulos. 2023. 
“Loan Guarantees, Bank Lending and Credit Risk Reallocation.” ECGI Finance Working Paper 
No. 944/2023, December 2023.   
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3963246 
Augustin, Patrick, Valeri Sokolovski, Marti G. Subrahmanyam, and Da vide Tomio. 2022. “In 
Sickness and in Debt: The COVID -19 Impact on Sovereign Credit Risk. ” Journal of Financial 
Economics 143, no. 3: 1251–74.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.05.009 
Autor, David, David Cho, Leland D. Crane, Mita Goldar, Byron Lutz, Joshua Montes, William B. 
Peterman, Da vid Ratner, Daniel Villar, and A hu Yildirmaz. 2022. “An Evaluation of the 
Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll Microdata. ” Journal of Public 
Economics 211 (July): 104664.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2022.104664 
Bartik, Alexander W., Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, Christopher T. Stanton, 
and Adi Sunderam. 2023. “When Should Programs be Privately Administered? Theory and 
Evidence from the Paycheck Protection Program. ” NBER Working Paper No. 27623 , July 
2023.   
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27623 
80
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 34 ---
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision ( BCBS). 2021. “Early Lessons from the C OVID-19 
Pandemic on the Basel Reforms. ” Bank for International Settlements, July 2021.   
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d521.pdf 
Beck, Thorsten, and Jan Keil. 2022. “Have Banks Caught Corona? Effects of COVID on Lending 
in the U.S.” Journal of Corporate Finance 72 (February): 102160.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2022.102160 
Benmelech, Efraim, and N itzan Tzur-Ilan. 2020. “The Determinants of F iscal and Monetary 
Policies during the COVID-19 Crisis.” NBER Working Paper No. 27461, July 2020.  
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27461 
Bergant, K atharina, and Kristin Forbes. 2023. “Policy Packages and Policy Space: Lessons 
from COVID-19.” European Economic Review 158 (September): 104499.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2023.104499  
Berger, Allen N., Paul G. Freed, J onathan A. Scott, and S iwen Zhang. 2025. “The Paycheck 
Protection Program (PPP) from the Small Business Perspective: Did the PPP H elp Alleviate 
Financial and Economic Constraints?” Mimeo, May 30, 2025.   
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3908707 
Capelle-Blancard, G unther, and A drien Desroziers. 2020. “The Stock Market Is Not the 
Economy? Insights from the COVID-19 Crisis.” CEPR Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time 
Papers 28 (June): 29–69.   
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3638208 
Casanova, C atherine, Br yan Hardy, and M ert Onen. 2021. “COVID-19 Policy Measures to 
Support Bank Lending.” BIS Quarterly Review (September): 45–59.  
https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt2109d.pdf 
Cascarino, Giuseppe, R affaele Gallo, Francesco Palazzo, and E nrico Sette. 2022. “Public 
Guarantees and Credit Additionality during the COVID-19 Pandemic.” Bank of Italy Working 
Paper No. 1369, April 2022.   
https://ideas.repec.org/p/anc/wmofir/172.html 
Checo, Ariadne, and Sophia Chen. 2022. “Distance to Insolvency: A New Cross -Country 
Dataset of Corporate Vulnerability.” Mimeo, August 2022 
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, O livier Darmouni, Stephan Luck, and Matthew Plosser. 2022. 
“Bank Liquidity Provision across the Firm Size Distribution.” Journal of Financial Economics 
144, no. 3: 908–32.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.06.035 
Ҫolak, Gönül, and Özde Öztekin. 2021. “The Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Bank Lending 
around the World.” Journal of Banking & Finance 133 (December): 106207.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2021.106207 
81
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 35 ---
Couaillier, Cyril, A lessio Reghezza, C ostanza Rodriguez d’Acri, and Alessandro Scopelli ti. 
2022. “How to Release Capital Requirements during a Pandemic? Evidence from Euro Area 
Banks.” ECB Working Paper No. 2720, September 2022.   
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4220377 
Cox, Josue, Daniel L. Greenwald, and Sydney C. Ludvigson. 2020. “What Explains the COVID-
19 Stock Market?” NBER Working Paper No. 27784, September 2020.   
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27784 
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, A lvaro Pedraza, and C laudia Ruiz-Ortega. 2021. “Banking Sector 
Performance during the COVID -19 Crisis. ” Journal of Banking & Finance  133 (December): 
106305.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2021.106305 
Demmou, Lilas, Sara Calligaris, Guido Franco, Dennis Dlugosch, Müge Adalet McGowan, and 
Sahra Sakha. 2021. “Insolvency and Debt Overhang Following the C OVID-19 Outbr eak: 
Assessment of Risks and Policy Responses. ” OECD Economics Department Working Papers, 
No. 1651, January 2021.   
https://doi.org/10.1787/747a8226-en 
Dursun-de Neef, H . Özlem, and A lexander Schandlbauer. 202 1. “COVID-19 and Lending 
Responses of European Banks.” Journal of Banking & Finance 133 (December): 106236.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2021.106236 
———. 2022. “COVID-19, Bank Deposits, and Lending. ” Journal of Empirical Finance  68 
(September): 20–33.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jempfin.2022.05.003 
ElFayoumi, Khal id, and M artina Hengge. 2021. “Capital Markets, C OVID-19 and Policy 
Measures.” IMF Working Paper No. 2021/033, February 2021.   
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4257306 
Gourinchas, Pierre-Ölivier, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Veronika Penciakova, and N ick Sander. 
2022. “Estimating SME Failures in Real Time: An Application to the COVID -19 Crisis.” CEPR 
Discussion Paper No. DP15323, January 2022.   
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3723512 
Granja, João, Christopher Makrid is, Constantine Yannelis, and Eric Zwick. 2022. “Did the 
Paycheck Protection Program Hit the Target? ” Journal of Financial Economics  145, no.  3: 
725–61.   
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2022.05.006 
Greenwald, Daniel L., John Krainer, and Pascal Paul. 2023. “The Credit Line Channel.” Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper No. 2020-26, August 2023.   
https://www.frbsf.org/wp-content/uploads/wp2020-26.pdf 
82
What Policy Combinations Worked?: The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during COVID-19 Kirti et al.

--- Page 36 ---
Guerini, Mattia, Lionel Nesta, Xavier Ragot, and Stefano Schi avo. 2020. “Firm Liquidity and 
Solvency under the Covid-19 Lockdown in France.” OFCE Policy Brief No. 76, July 2020.  
https://sciencespo.hal.science/hal-03403022 
Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Michael R. Strain. 2020. “Has the Paycheck Protection Program 
Succeeded?” NBER Working Paper No. 28032, October 2020.   
http://www.nber.org/papers/w28032 
Huneeus, Federico, Joseph P. Kaboski, Mauricio Larrain, Sergio L. Schmukler, and Mario Vera. 
2022. “The Distribution of Crisis Credit: Effects on Firm Indebtedness and Aggregate Risk. ” 
NBER Working Paper No. 29774, March 2023.   
http://www.nber.org/papers/w29774 
Igan, Deniz, Ali Mirzaei, and T omoe Moore. 2023. “A Shot in the Arm: Economic Support 
Packages and Firm Performance during COVID -19.” Journal of  Corporate Finance  78 
(February): 102340.  
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2022.102340 
Jiménez, Gabriel, Luc Laeven, Da vid Martinez-Miera, and José -Luis Peydró. 202 4. “Public 
Guarantees, Relationship Lending and Bank Credit: Evidence from the COVID-19 Crisis.” ECB 
Working Paper Series No. 2913, March 2024.   
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4057530 
Kirti, Divya, Yang Liu, Maria Soledad Martínez Peria, Pra chi Mishra, and Jan Strasky. 2023. 
“Tracking Economic and Financial Policies during COVID -19: An Announcement -Level 
Database.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP17879, February 2023.   
https://cepr.org/publications/dp17879 
Kirti, Divya, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria,  Prachi Mishra, and Jan Strasky. 2025. “Appendix 
to ‘What Policy Combinations Worked? The Effect of Policy Packages on Bank Lending during 
COVID-19.’” Unpublished supplement, September 2025.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5533 
Li, Lei, Philip E. Strahan, and Song Zhang. 2020. “Banks as Lenders of First Resort: Evidence 
from the C OVID-19 Crisis. ” Review of Corporate Finance Studies  9, no.  3: 472 –500.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/rcfs/cfaa009 
Valencia, Fabián, Richard Varghese, Weijia Yao, and Juan F. Yépez. 2021. “Handle with Care: 
Regulatory Easing in Times of COVID-19.” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 22, no. 1: 363–96. 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2021/02/26/Handle-with-Care-
Regulatory-Easing-in-Times-of-COVID-19-50126  
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
83
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3