--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Vincenzo La Via Lessons Learned: Vincenzo La Via 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Vincenzo La Via," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 2, 
372-374. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1664 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/18 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss2/18

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Vincenzo La Via 
By Mercedes Cardona  
Vincenzo La Via joined the World Bank Group  in 2005 as chief financial officer, in charge of 
financial reporting, accounting, strategic planning and budgeting, credit risk, corporate 
finance, market risk, liquidity and asset management, and product development.  During his 
tenure, La Via took part in the bank ’s response to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the 
subsequent European Sovereign Debt Crisis. He left the bank in 2012 to become director general 
of the Treasury in the Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance as the Italian government took 
on reform of the banking sector. He left the public sector in 2019 to become managing director 
and CEO for Europe and the Middle East at Promontory Financial Group. This “Lesson Learned” 
is based on an interview with La Via in December 2022; the full transcript may be found here. 
Don’t fight the last battle. New threats are constantly emerging. 
Under La Via’s direction, the World Bank had been preparing to serve as a counterbalance to 
an extreme event, but it had not foreseen one as extreme as the GFC. Most regulators would 
have expected the next crisis to be on the scope of the derivatives-fed collapse of Long-Term 
Capital Management  (LTCM), the massive US hedge fund whose 1998 bailout narrowly 
averted further instability.  
Before the GFC erupted, the World Bank  had strengthened its balance sheet to be ready to 
provide liquidity and stability in a crisis, but the extent of the GFC still caught many by 
surprise, he observed:  
What I would tell myself, because that’s a mistake that we all make, is: “Don’t fight the 
old war.” You must be on the lookout and monitor developments with an open eye, 
using all the information available because the next crisis is going to be different from 
the old crisis. We ’ve seen it all the time. I mean, we then thought the next crisis was 
going to be another LTCM, and obviously it was not.  
Following the GFC, all parties in the financial system have become conversant in risk, or at 
least financial risk, said La Via. But other risks could also pose important threats, he warned. 
Geopolitical risk—as seen with the Russian invasion of Ukraine—and cybersecurity risks can 
spawn serious events that regulators and other officials have not anticipated. A whole 
generation of chief risk officers (CROs) have focused stress tests on credit and market risk, 
but not other kinds of risks, he warned:  
I sense more and more that these CROs are not ready for a potential and massive 
increase in nonfinancial risk, which I think could be the next crisis to happen. Because 
of that, I think regulators really need to further work to strengthen the resiliency of 
the system. We n eed to have CROs that are really looking at all types of risks. They 
should not be handled in different silos, but holistically.  
372

--- Page 4 ---
Keep a lookout on the wider world. All economies are interconnected.  
European regulators, both regional and country-specific, were initially unfazed by the crisis 
brewing in the United States. “Early recognition of the gravity of the problem right away and 
collective action to recapitalize banks would have really helped ,” La Via said. However, he 
continued, most European authorities initially assumed the crisis was a problem specific to 
the US housing sector, so countries like Italy, which lacked a significant mortgage market,  
felt it was not a concern. “There was a lot of complacency everywhere in Europe about this 
being the problems of the others. And there was also this concept that Fortress Europe would 
be very resilient, that we would survive this,” said La Via.  
At the time of the GFC, the European  Union lacked many of the mechanisms needed to 
stabilize the region as a whole. Monetary and banking policy were still the remit of individual 
countries, and they each responded in their own way, with little coordination. In some cases, 
this exacerbated national debt, which would later be reflected in the Sovereign Debt Crisis in 
2010.  
There was not that sense of urgency in Europe. That is very clear. We also suggested  
to recapitalize  the EIB [European Investment Bank]. The same way a well-capitalized 
World Bank had the ammunition to lend to developing countries, the EIB could have 
played a very important role in Europe ’s recovery. That was not  done; eventually, 
each country in Europe moved on its own, and there was a sort of panic in bailing out 
banks as they had trouble.  
In the aftermath  of the crises, t he European Commission acted to establish the European 
banking union, which included the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution 
Mechanism, providing a harmonized framework for all European banks . One of the notable 
legacies of the GFC and the Sovereign Debt Crisis was the development of a regional stability 
framework that proved itself once COVID-19 caused another crisis, La Via noted:   
The combination of the 2008 crisis and the Sovereign Debt Crisis was the most 
incredible stress test you could have imagined for Europe, and Europe survived.  The 
sense of urgency accelerated the creation of institutions that we should have had and 
we did not have. And in doing that, Europe constructed a system that is now much 
more resilient than it was then.  
Since the pandemic afflicted all nations, it was easier to find consensus  to deal with the 
emergency, and it has continued the conversation about improving regional tools and 
cohesion, he said. 
Europe has really worked together very well. The ECB has acted effectively. There 
have been a lot of initiatives at the European level,  including the new national plans 
for recovery and resiliency. So, a lot of progress was made very quickly. 
  
373
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Act quickly and decisively. Do “whatever it takes” to bring back confidence.  
Some measures taken to ride out the GFC contributed to economic woes that would manifest 
later as the Sovereign Debt Crisis. That crisis raged on until European Central Bank President 
Mario Draghi stated that the bank was ready to do “whatever it takes” to protect the nascent 
euro. Until then, “there was a lot of noise about countries not necessarily being able to stay 
within Europe,” said La Via. The speech marked a turning point in bringing back confidence, 
a necessary ingredient to any recovery. 
Be ready to act quickly to help restore confide nce. If I had the position, if I had the 
responsibility, I would act as quickly as possible, as forcefully as possible to restore 
confidence. Because it’s also the cheapest way to solve a crisis. Restoring confidence 
could be anything. It could come in the  form of injecting money into the system or 
simply reiterating in a credible way the functioning of the system, and the full backing 
by the monetary authorities and the government.  
Dated: June 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022–30 
374
Lessons Learned: Vincenzo La Via Cardona