--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Benoît Cœuré Lessons Learned: Benoît Cœuré 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Benoît Cœuré," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 2, 
366-368. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1662 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/16 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss2/16

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Benoît Cœuré 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Benoît Cœuré held several positions in the French Treasury in the years leading to the Global 
Financial Crisis  (GFC). He was an economic advis er to the director general of the French 
Treasury from 1997 –2002, deputy chief executive and chief executive of the French debt 
management office from 2002–2007, and assistant secretary for multilateral affairs, trade, and 
development from 2007 –2009. H e served as  chief economist and deputy director general in 
2009–2011. He joined the European Central Bank ( ECB) during the European Sovereign debt 
Crisis and was responsible for market operations, market infrastructure supervision and 
European and international relations as a member of the ECB Executive Board and the 
Governing Council from 2012 through 2019. He was elected chairman of the BIS Committee on 
Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) in 2013 and was named to head the BIS 
Innovation Hub in 2020, a position he held until 2022. Since 2022, he has been president of the 
Autorité de la concurrence, France’s competition oversight authority. This “Lesson Learned” is 
based on an interview with Cœuré in July 2024; the full transcript may be found here. 
Understand that financial policy decisions have macroprudential consequences; don’t 
underestimate the effects of banking policy on the economy.  
European regulators underestimated the effect of the GFC at first, considering it a US 
phenomenon, and then assumed the crisis was mainly a threat to the banking sector . They 
addressed it with liquidity measures that were quite effective but should have been 
combined with macroeconomic stimulus, said Cœuré.  
This viewpoint also led to pulling back some of the liquidity measures that had been 
successful, even as  they were still needed. Once the immediate liquidity crisis abated, 
European authorities were eager to curtail many of the measures to reduce government 
deficits. That was a mistake, Cœuré explained:  
This was really seen as a liquidity crisis and a crisis of confidence, a collapse of 
confidence in the banking system, and the macro consequences were, in my view, 
vastly underestimated: the fact that the banking system would be unable to lend to 
the economy as much as it should, and that this would create a credit crunch tha t 
would weigh on GDP and jobs, which is what we saw in 2009. 
Very soon in 2009, there was an international discussion on how to bring public 
finances back to balance. There were initiatives to say that whatever had been paid 
during the crisis had been need ed, but that now debt had to be cut back and 
government deficits had to come back to balance. That was a mistake. The impact of 
this crisis on the economy was vastly underestimated. Together with micro support 
to the financial system, there should have bee n a lot of macro support through 
monetary policy easing and fiscal stimulus, and that did not happen early enough. 
366

--- Page 4 ---
In hindsight, said Cœuré, the macroeconomic impact of the liquidity and monetary policy 
measures was not fully understood until after the Sovereign Debt Crisis. The ECB even tried 
to hike interest rates in 2011 –2014; “too soon,” said Cœuré. The hike had to be rolled back 
months later, when the region’s economies slowed down.   
There was a consensus in Europe that fiscal policy had to be tighter . So, the whole 
macro policy stance was getting tighter at the time whe n the eurozone was hit by a 
financial crisis, which in hindsight was a big mistake. But of course, that was 
understood only later. There should have been much earlier macro reaction to 
support the economy in this tightening financial environment, both fiscal easing and 
monetary easing. And that came much, much later. 
Successful c risis management often requires quick and bold  actions and quantum 
leaps in policy. 
The European Union consens us during the Sovereign Debt Crisis called for tighter fiscal 
policy at a time when a crisis was spreading, from the smaller economies of Greece, Portugal, 
and Ireland to the much larger ones in Spain and Italy ; such a policy was a mistake , said 
Cœuré. In his opinion, programs such as quantitative easing would have been useful during 
the crisis of 2011–2012, but they did not come into play until 2015. In 2012, the ECB was not 
ready politically or philosophically to take a “quantum leap ” to a more active monetary 
policy, said Cœuré.   
As a counterpoint, said Cœuré, by the time the COVID-19 pandemic spread across Europe in 
2020, the ECB was further along the learning curve. The authorities had internalized the idea 
that being fast to react was of the essence. Initially, ECB President Christine Lagarde had to 
walk back comments that the ECB was “not here to close spreads” in the bond market, which 
caused a bad market reaction. But the ECB course-corrected and acted decisively on COVID, 
with the EUR 750 billion Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme. “I think that was a 
lesson from the previous crisis, that you don’t have the luxury to wait and see. You’ve got to 
act in a preemptive way,” said Cœuré.  
The pandemic emergency response also benefitted from limited moral hazard concerns and 
an unusual alignment between fiscal and monetary policy goals that made them mutually 
supportive. The response also showed that some lessons from previous crises had been 
absorbed. The EU chose to issue common European  debt, the EUR 750 billion Next 
Generation EU program, to finance the pandemic programs.  
That understanding , that there was a need for common and forceful fiscal action, 
that’s something that protected the ECB, because that was something that the ECB 
didn’t have to do. From 2010 to 2015, I’m oversimplifying a bit, but in a way, the ECB 
was left to its own devices. There was no fiscal policy to speak of, and the ECB had to 
do all the heavy lifting in terms of supporting the region. In 2020, it was different. 
There was significant fiscal act ion, which made life easier for the ECB. And that ’s an 
important lesson that was learned as well on the fiscal side. 
367
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
However, according to Cœuré, these lessons remain half -learned. “The big ideas that came 
from the crisis, in fact, they were only half  implemented, and a lot remains to be done, ” he 
said. The EU banking union remains “in the middle of the river ,” with only some of the 
regulatory measures it needs, such as a strong deposit insurance program, according to 
Cœuré. Additionally, the EU still lacks fiscal capacity at the European level. He explained,  
Then, there was no significant progress towards a common fiscal capacity in the 
eurozone. There was one very positive episode, which is this Next Generation EU plan 
in 2020. But that ’s a standalone. That ’s pretty much an episode. There is no 
permanent fiscal mechanism for the eurozone. Which means that again, when the 
next crisis hits, presumably the ECB will again have to do everything, because there 
will be no fiscal policy to speak of at the eurozone level. 
In spite of the lack of political will that may follow the recent elections of nationalistic 
governments across the region and their refocusing on issues such as defense following 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Cœuré said he believes the EU will find its way. The COVID 
response showed the ECB will come through in a crisis and develop the tools it needs, he 
said. 
Whenever Europe had to face a crisis, we always made it, because crises are times 
and events where Europe reveals itself. You’ve got this famous quote by Jean Monnet 
that says that Europe has been built through crisis, and it is the sum of the solutions 
that were brought to these crises. I ’d rather it not be true, but it is very true. Our 
discussion today provides ample evidence of it. 
So, yes, there is little political capital , or there might be some political fatigue across 
the board. But when the next crisis hits, I’m pretty confident that Europe will make it 
because we’ve always made it when facing crisis. A crisis gives you e nergy that you 
just didn’t know you had. 
Dated: June 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022–35 
368
Lessons Learned: Benoît Cœuré Cardona