--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks: Prioritizing Recovery over Containing Runs on Solvent Banks: Prioritizing Recovery over 
Resolution Resolution 
Edoardo David Martino 
University of Amsterdam 
Enrico C. Perotti 
University of Amsterdam 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, and 
the Law and Economics Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Martino, Edoardo David and Perotti, Enrico C. (2025) "Containing Runs on Solvent Banks: Prioritizing 
Recovery over Resolution," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 1-30. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1598 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/1 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote 
We wish to thank Viral Acharya, Charles Goodhart and Sebastiano Laviola (discussant) for their very 
useful comments. A previous version of this article was presented at the FSB Workshop on Systemic 
Implications of the Banking Turmoil in Basel; Single Resolution Board Seminar; Strengthening the 
Resilience of European Banking Sector Workshop in Brussels; Bank of England Seminar; Bundesbank 
Seminar, CEPR Webinar; 41st EALE conference in Turin. We gratefully acknowledge the comments of all 
participants. The usual disclaimer appliesA timely recapitalization option requires stronger supervisory 
powers to activate a timely going concern recapitalization, such as by equity conversion of AT1 CoCo 
debt. A contingent liquidity measure would be redemption charges activated automatically upon large 
outflows of uninsured deposits. The goal is to interrupt any self-fulfilling expectation of further outflows. 
The measure mirrors new SEC norms created for institutional MMFs, the natural benchmark for uninsured 
corporate deposits. The combination creates a framework for credible interim intervention and a chance 
to steer solvent banks towards recovery early on rather than settling for forbearance and increasing the 
probability of resolution and bailouts. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol7/iss1/1

--- Page 3 ---
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks:  
Prioritizing Recovery over Resolution 
Edoardo D. Martino1 and Enrico Perotti2,3  
Abstract 
The sudden banking defaults in the spring of 2023 proved current prudential norms 
insufficient to prevent bank distress. Capital and liquidity norms need to be adjusted. The 
experience also shows how a lack of credible supervisory tools led to forbearance and finally 
chaotic public bailouts. An intervention gap arises when viable but undercapitalized banks 
are at the mercy of runs. Once outflows start to escalate, all that is left is to prepare for 
resolution and assign losses. We call for new Pillar II— that is, activated by the supervisor—
stabilizing measures, as contingent capital and liquidity tools. 
A timely recapitalization option requires stronger supervisory powers to activate a timely 
going-concern recapitalization, such as by equity conversion of additional Tier 1 contingent 
convertible debt. One contingent liquidity measure is the automatic activation of redemption 
charges upon large outflows of uninsured deposits. The goal is to interrupt any self-fulfilling 
expectation of further o utflows. The measure mirrors new US Securities and Exchange 
Commission norms created for institutional money market funds, the natural benchmark for 
uninsured corporate deposits. The combination creates a framework for credible interim 
intervention and a c hance to steer solvent banks toward recovery early on rather than 
settling for forbearance and increasing the probability of resolution and bailouts. 
Keywords: bank recovery, bank resolution, contingent capital, redemption charges 
JEL Classifications: G21, G33, K20
 
1 Edoardo D . Martino, Assistant Professor of Law, Amsterdam Center for Law & Economics, University of 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands and Research Associate, European Banking Institute, Frankfurt, Germany. Email: 
e.d.martino@uva.nl. 
2 Enrico Perotti, Professor of International Finance, Amsterdam Business School, University of Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands. DNB senior consultant, CEPR Fellow. Email: e.c.perotti@uva.nl. 
3 We wish to thank Viral Acharya , Charles Goodhart, and Sebastiano L aviola (discussant) for their very useful 
comments. A previous version of this article was presented at the FSB Workshop on Systemic Implications of 
the Banking Turmoil in Basel; Single Resolution Board Seminar; Strengthening the Resilience of European 
Banking Sector Workshop in Brussels; Bank of England Seminar; Bundesbank Seminar, CEPR Webinar; 41st 
EALE conference in Turin. We gratefully acknowledge the comments of all participants. All remaining errors 
are our own.  
1

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction 
The key reforms of the Basel III agreements since 2008 had three goals: limit risk incentives, 
avoid bailouts , and contain spillover (contagion) effects.  The first goal was served by 
stronger Basel III capital and liquidity norms that produced a more resilient banking sector. 
Bailout and contagion risks were supposed to be addressed by bail-in capital and new Pillar 
II—that is, activated by the supervisor—powers for capital guidance. Yet the experience with 
massive bank runs in 2023 imposes new conclusions. 
Capital and liquidity requirements need to be recalibrated based on the new evidence. But 
next to this primary need, there are more specific implications. First, supervisory hesitation 
to intervene on undercapital ized banks in a timely manner is driven by fears of triggering 
panics. Regulatory forbearance buys time but ultimately extends value deterioration and 
increases losses. Second, it has become painfully evident how even at an early phase of 
distress, there are hardly any (bailout-free) policy tools to contain runs. Finally, the diffusion 
of social media usage led to an extraordinary acceleration of self -reinforcing panic runs 
(Cookson et al. 2023). At a time of rising rates and diffused losses on safe assets held in the 
banking book, a large share of the banking sector faces huge liquidity risk from uninsured 
depositors with no tools for containment  (Jiang et al. 2024) . Extensive reforms since 2008 
have raised the level of the dams against flooding. However, o nce high water threatens to 
run over, there are no remedies (stored sandbags) other than absorbing losses by bailouts.4 
The key timing of remedial actions on capital is once losses bite into a bank ’s conservation 
buffer. The limited tools available in this phase (at best, a suspension of dividends) are hardly 
ever activated, due to chilling concerns that any public action may lead to self -sustaining 
runs. 
We propose a new framework to prioritize bank recovery over bank resolution, beneficial in 
several asp ects. The main goal is to give solvent but undercapitalized banks a chance to 
recover early enough, removing the bias toward forbearance. Second, it will improve the 
credibility of going-concern supervisory powers, prompting more risk -absorbing capital 
once conservation buffers are about to be breached. Finally, it will ensure that private bail-
in requirements are implemented. At the same time, reform proposals should ensure reliable 
access to own funds for depositors and a transparent process for bail-inable investors. These 
interim measures should be activated upon specific quantifiable indicators. The trigger may 
lead to an automatic activation or empower supervisors to do so, with the aim to foster the 
recovery of viable but undercapitalized banks. 
The rest of the article unfolds as follows. Section II describes some visible shortcomings of 
the current regime. Once capital levels start to deteriorate, there are no credible tools to 
 
4 Since 2008, the total amount of bai l-in for uninsured bank deposits is zero, in both the E uropean Union and 
the U nited States. The notable exception is the Cyprus bank crisis resolution managed by international 
institutions, where large uninsured deposits banks (mostly foreign) were partial ly bailed in. 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
increase risk absorption or control run incentives. We discuss separately the poor incentives 
resulting from excess leverage and forbearance (Martynova, Perotti, and Suarez 2022)  and 
the run incentives created by unconditional sequential service (Diamond and Dybvig 1983; 
Matta and Perotti 2024) . Section III proposes two key inte rim measures on capital and 
liquidity, namely (a) a credible regime for going-concern recapitalization and  (b) the 
introduction of contingent redemption charges, automatically triggered by uninsured 
deposit outflows. Section IV proposes the principles guiding the activation and calibration of 
these interim measures. Section V compares these proposals with other reform options in 
terms of risk allocation and risk incentives. Section VI concludes. 
II. A Regulatory Blind Spot  
Several reform proposals since March 2023 have focused on robust ex  ante prudential 
measures. On the one han d, higher capital and liquidity norms (Admati and Hellwig 2024); 
on the other hand, an expansion of deposit insurance coverage (Heider et al. 2023) , 
mirroring the de facto bailout of all the Silicon Valley Bank  (SVB) uninsured depositors—
accounting for 94% of the bank’s deposit base.  
Higher buffers are most effective but hard to implement; public insurance reduces runs only 
at high fiscal costs and moral hazard incentives.  We argue that higher capital and liquidity 
buffers are indispensable. Yet it is also  essential to strengthen interim measures aimed at 
preventing unnecessary resolution. The current recovery and resolution framework is not 
credible and has poor preventive effects (Martino and Parchimowicz 2021; Martynova, 
Perotti, and Suarez 2022). Too often, resolution reform has been seen narrowly as ensuring 
orderly liquidation, a ready plan for smoothly allocating gone-concern losses. This approach 
leans toward a passive acceptance of insolvency risk and leads to excessive bailouts. 
We argue that a new emphasis on preventive measures is crucial to avoid potentially viable 
banks’ sliding into insolvency once undercapitalized. At present , we have a blind 
intervention spot: once distress starts, we have no credible tools to promote recovery or 
contain run incentives, so outflows can easily escalate into self-fulfilling runs. 
Consider the current sequence of Pillar II intervention steps. A stress test evaluation may 
lead to conclude that the bank is insolvent, or potentially solvent but undercapitalized 
(Figure 1). In the first case, the supervisor must put in resolution the in solvent bank; the 
second case calls for a path to going-concern recapitalization. However, at present, there are 
no effective tools to support such a recovery, short of public risk absorption. We call this a 
serious intervention gap. 
Notionally, once supervisors become aware of bank -specific losses, they are empowered to 
initiate a Pillar II “capital guidance process,” indicating capital surcharges based on the result 
of stress tests.5 However, bank shareholders are under no legal obligation to contribute new 
 
5 This process is organized differently across jurisdictions, with different consequences in case of 
noncompliance. 
3
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 6 ---
equity, though they face the risk of insolvency. The main Pillar II capital tool is to restrict the 
right to distribute dividends. Even this limited step is avoided as supervisors fear triggering 
runs. 
Figure 1: Bank Status and Regulatory Practices 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
We discuss sequentially the risk incentives resulting from excess leverage and forbearance 
(Martynova, Perotti, and Suarez 2022)  and the run incentives created by unconditional 
sequential service (Diamond and Dybvig 1983; Matta and Perotti 2024). 
The Bank Recapitalization Game 
Once supervisors recognize a capital shortfall under an adverse scenario , they activate the 
regime of capital guidance, demanding an appropriate capital increase. 6 The bank complies 
via retained earnings or a private recapitalization. However, bank shareholders often resist 
retaining risk-absorbing equity as long as dividends are still allowed. They may claim that 
maintaining their payout is necessary to avoid sending adverse signals  and fearin g the 
stigma attached to such a n adverse public signal (Gorton and Ordoñez 2020). For the same 
 
6 Capital surcharges reflect microprudential buffers and bank-specific guidance, as well as on macroprudential 
surcharges. 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
reason, supervisors postpone suspending payout rights (Gambacorta, Oliviero, and Shin 
2023).7 
Unresolved losses lead easily into a phase of debt overhang, where private incentives to 
recapitalize deteriorate further. An undercapitalized bank with a viable business model may 
well be solvent once its deposit franchise (charter value) is recognized. The challenge is that 
private refinancing incentives are much weaker when forbearance is expected, leading to a 
strategic waiting game where bank shareholders, managers, and regulators seek to buy time 
hoping to induce others to shoulder (increasing) losses . In this “capital forbearance” game 
(Martynova, Perotti, and Suarez 2022), bank shareholders have incentive to play for a lucky 
recovery or public support. 
The lack of a credible measure leads to an “intervention gap” until resolution (Cecchetti and 
Schoenholtz 2023). Supervisors hesitate to take actions indicating weak bank solvency as 
they fear a loss of confidence (Ahnert and Georg 2018). They are left with exerting discreet 
“moral suasion” (sending increasingly stern letters demanding recapitalization)  and finally 
declaring the bank insolvent. Bank investors can buy time to “gamble for resurrection,” with 
poor risk incentives leading to a steady loss of value. As it became clear in the period before 
the March 2023 runs, once the bank enters a phase of e levated debt overhang, a private 
recapitalization becomes unrealistic while risk incentives deteriorate rapidly. 
Unfortunately, in this phase, time is not on the side of regulators. There are few intervention 
tools, and fears of triggering runs are by now well justified. Forbearance serves as a delaying 
tactic but discourages private recovery actions. In the absence of new risk -absorbing 
capacity, it is ultimately a gamble that leads to even larger expected fiscal losses even for an 
initially solvent but undercapitalized bank. 
Supervisors are currently confronted with two suboptimal options. Available tools (such as 
a suspension of dividend payout) offer little immediate relief while sending a signal about 
bank losses, thus triggering a run. On the other hand, prolonged forbearance worsens capital 
deterioration, increasing the probability of a run at a rising fiscal cost (Figure 2). 
The dynamic we describe in this section stands also when considering alternative tools 
whereby undercapitalized banks have the p ossibility to seek help to prompt recovery. 
Especially in the US, discount windows represent the most common of such tools. However, 
discount windows are rarely used by banks because of their opt -in design, which requires 
banks to actively seek help from t he Federal Reserve, sending a public signal to the rest of 
the market. Banks usually shy away from t he stigma attached to such a public signal 
(Armantier et al. 2015; Ennis 2019).  
In the upcoming sections, we detail our proposals aimed at timely recovery over resolution 
and avoiding forbearance. In Appendixes A and B, we detail the background situation 
 
7 After Deutsche Bank faced a legal restriction to pay a single coupon on its CoCo debt due to insufficient book 
equity, supervisors responded to a fall in bond prices by pressing for a revised legal interpretation of minimum 
requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities ( MREL) norms to allow the payment, and in the same year 
allowed the bank to pay out a dividend. 
5
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 8 ---
informing such a proposal, discussing the key insights from the European Union ( EU) 
experience with  contingent convertible  (CoCo) debt as well as the recent Credit Suisse 
additional Tier 1 (AT1) conversion. 
Figure 2: Intervention Gap and Regulatory Game 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
III. Design and Complementarity of Interim Measures  
We turn to discuss specific contingent tools to pro tect bank capital and liquidity in early 
distress. We propose an early distress measure on capital and an acute distress measure on 
liquidity. We first detail the necessity to make going-concern bail-in of AT1 instruments 
credible and effective. Thereafter, we argue that measures to contain uninsured runs should 
instead be automatic, as they address a core stability issue. Appendix C details the economic 
and legal definition of “solvent but undercapitalized” banks, necessary to legitimize interim 
recovery tools. 
On the capital side, we propose strengthening the Pillar II mandate on the going-concern loss 
absorption of contingent convertible debt. On the liquidity side, we propose introducing 
simple liquidity fee rules (that is, contingent charges) on uninsured deposits in case of large 
outflows. The two measures complement each other, allowing qualifying banks to recover 
without public funding while minimizing the risk of unnecessary runs. 
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
Going-concern Bail-in 
Any reform aiming at a credible preventive recapitalization require s two steps. First, an 
increase in capital norms to be mandatorily satisfied by a minimum of CoCo capital, 
convertible on a higher trigger than currently admissible —at least above the minimum 
capital conservation buffer o f 7% of book equity over risk -weighted assets. Second, it will 
involve an enhanced Pillar II mandate to both enable and force authorities to activate 
conversion, upon a supervisory assessment that the bank is undercapitalized but solvent. A 
timely reduction in leverage will grant immediate breathing space and remove r un 
incentives. Such a preventive recapitalization can be seen as a form of “in loco bancaruptae,” 
a going-concern recapitalization that does not require default. 
An efficient conversion process may be delayed too long by concerns that it may serve as a 
coordinating event for self-fulfilling runs. Accordingly, we turn to outline a complementary 
and necessary component of our reform proposal to favor recovery over resolution. 
Figure 3 depicts the effect of going-concern recapitalization, timed when new privat e risk 
absorption is not forthcoming due to debt overhang. For such a tool to become credible, the 
regulatory norms and contractual feature of AT1 contingent capital have to be redefined to 
ensure that the going-concern loss absorption will happen promptly .8 This requires 
resolving the current legal ambiguity over the executability of the conversion trigger ahead 
of default. 
Figure 3: Capital Adequacy and Going-concern Bail-in 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
 
8 See Appendixes A and B for details on the EU and Swiss experiences and failures with AT1 going-concern loss 
absorption. 
7
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 10 ---
There are legitimate concerns that any decisive going-concern bail-in will require equally 
credible tools to contain subsequent panic, potentially generating runs. However, this is not 
a state of things that we should passively accept. Rather, the interim recapitalization through 
the going-concern bail-in of CoCos should be made credible by complementary reforms 
addressing the panic concerns. The following sections discuss the key nodes of uninsured 
deposit outflows and how redemption charges can contain runs. This, in turn, makes going-
concern bail-in more credible. 
Run Incentives 
Typically, a run does not come completely unannounced. Looking at US banks that failed 
from 1934 to 2022 , Ohlrogge ( forthcoming) shows significant outflows of uninsured 
deposits in the four years before the failure, showing how runs should be understood as a 
dynamic process. Unfortunately, recent runs have proven much faster, as they were driven 
by intense social media concerns leading to a fulminating run coordination.  Such a context 
virtually renders current supervisory options useless, imposing a strict blackmail for fiscal 
bailouts of uninsured claims. 
Yet too often , a bank run is seen as a black box, a self -escalating process that cannot be 
contained once it is triggered. This is a simplistic and self-defeating view. To be able to deal 
lucidly with this threat, it is important to break down the dynamics of run incentives. The 
key determinant is the net rollover payoff, the difference between the expected value of 
joining the queue and rolling over (Matta and Perotti 2024). 
Runs tend to start after some adverse signal induces depositors with an immediate need for 
liquidity to withdraw. These early outflows include investors that front -run and extremely 
“risk intolerant” depositors who will not accept even an infinitesimal risk of default. But the 
key issue is whether the larger group of depositors with no cash needs becomes concerned 
about a full escalation. Under current norms guaranteeing unconditional sequential service 
of all depositors, there are no exit costs. Therefore, the net rollover payoff if many choose to 
withdraw is negative even for solvent banks. Once the expectation that others will run set s 
in, withdrawing becomes a one-way sure bet, triggering a full-blown panic. This is the classic 
self-fulfilling logic of panic runs, which may take down even solvent banks (Diamond and 
Dybvig 1983). 
Thus, a decisive intervention introducing some conditionality to the sequential service of 
uninsured depositors may be effective in taming the perception of an escalation in outflows. 
At present, bank supervisors (unlike money market mutual fund  supervisors) have no tool 
to stop a run in progress. 
Figure 4 depicts the progress of uninsured outflows, at first building slowly then finally  
escalating into a self -fulfilling run. The key inflection point is when depositors with no 
immediate liquidity needs start to fear a large escalation. 
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
Figure 4: Withdrawal Stabilization through Redemption Charges 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
Containing Escalation of Outflows 
It is essential to protect bank liquidity upon large outflows of uninsured deposits. Next to 
higher reserves for uninsured deposits, it is important to introduce interim measures to 
address the problem when it presents its elf. We propose introducing “liquidity pricing” in 
the form of flat redemption charges upon large withdrawals. This procedure allows savers 
and firms to withdraw anytime, suffering only a minor discount to face value in extreme 
events. 
The approach follows the money market fund (MMF) reform after the Global Financial Crisis 
of 2007–2009, revamped in March 2020. MMFs had been the main destination for corporate 
cash pools, so they are a natural benchmark for corporate needs. The 2016 MMF reforms 
focused on sl owing down outflow s by temporary suspensions. Funds were mandated to 
impose such gates upon rapid outflows to avoid encouraging front -running, once liquid 
reserves were almost exhausted. This regime was functionally similar in the US and the EU.  
However, in March 2020 , money market fund managers proved reluctant to impose gates. 
Instead, t hey sold less -liquid claims to avoid triggering a mandatory suspension of 
redemptions, leading to fire sales. Lack of an automatic trigger leads to failure to suspend 
redemption in time, undermining the credibility of gates (Matta and Perotti 2024). A similar 
issue is the reluctance of banks to benefit from discount window lending, fearing stigma and 
the related adverse reaction of other market participants. 
9
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 12 ---
After a long debate, the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) decided to eliminate 
gates, which were seen as too disruptive . In their place , the new norms aim at containing 
runs by introducing the equivalent of “congestion charges .” Investors now regain 
unconstrained access to their funds even in a run, but at a small discount from net asset 
value. This contingent penalty is automatically trig gered by large outflows, thus avoiding a 
discretionary choice by the fund administrators. Allowing withdrawals even in a run but at 
a discount ensures access to own funds but also serves as a reliable brake on run incentives, 
protecting those who do not run.  
Imposing temporary redemption charges on uninsured deposits outflows target s the one-
sided incentive to withdraw at par, directly reducing run incentives. Critically, charges may 
also shift expectations of further withdrawals by others, avoiding escalation driven by fear 
of dilution rather than solvency concerns  (Matta, Oostdam , and Perotti , forthcoming). 
Contingent charges serve as a Pigouvian tax on withdrawals with no liquidity needs, as they 
internalize (and therefore eliminate) the strategic complementarity they may cause (Perotti 
and Suarez 2011) . Full swing pricing removes r un incentives driven by dilution risk, since 
illiquidity is fully priced , However, the level of charges should not be so large as to create 
difficulties for those with authentic liquidity needs. Allocating revenues from charges to all 
unpaid depositors after default enables to reduce run incentives even for moderate level of 
charges (Matta, Oostdam, and Perotti, forthcoming).  
Contingent charges will not (and should not) alter the behavior of depositors with immediate 
liquidity needs. Their role is to resha pe the response by depositors with no liquidity needs 
and stop the risk of a self -fulfilling escalation (Figure 5). Charges aimed at discouraging the 
escalation of run incentives still support the principle of unconditional access to liquidity, at 
a modest price in distress times. 
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 5: Depositors’ Reaction to Adverse Information 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
Collateral pre-positioning represents a widely discussed alternative as a mean for banks to 
ensure against runs. However, such practice is characterized by operational frictions 
(McLaughlin 2024). Moreover, the fear of stigma for large pre -positioning prevents banks 
from making use of this opportunity (Gorton, Ross, and Ross 2024) . This is in line with the 
arguments we developed in this article, as both banks and supervisors do not want to send 
public signals early on so that forbearance and delay remain the dominant strategy.  
Resolving the Regulatory Gap 
An automatic stabilizing tool that discourages sudden outflows will reduce concerns that 
public measures may lead to inevitable escalation. This increases the effectiveness of capital-
related interim measures and reduces the incentives to forbear. Both measures represent a 
form of preventive partial bail -in that will preserve going-concern value for solvent 
intermediaries. 
Effective interim measures can change the perverse dynamics discussed in Section II. Figure 
6 depicts the key nodes for a solvent but undercapitalized bank when recovery measures are 
in place. 
The key insight is that once effective contingent tools are available, the supervisor has a 
credible alternative to forbearance and can be firmer in  promoting a timely private 
recapitalization. 
Contingent charges should target depositors with no liquidity needs and no extreme risk 
intolerance, to reshape their incentives to withdraw and stop the risk of a self -fulfilling 
11
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 14 ---
escalation. This happens throu gh both a direct and indirect channel. First, the incentive to 
stay (net rollover risk) is increased by the temporary exit cost imposed by the charge. 
Moreover, charges clearly discourage immediate exit by everyone, reducing the expectation 
that other depositors will be inclined to front-run to avoid dilution. As depositor fears about 
escalation subsume, charges imposed at the critical infle ction point can reverse the self -
fulfilling prophecy. 
Therefore, c harges appear superior to gating when immediate acce ss to liquidity is 
unconditionally more important than absolute safety, as is likely the case for corporate 
deposits. Charges eliminate the inaction problem of gates that is driven by the fear of stigma 
as they apply automatically. Conversely, they overcom e the forbearance incentives, 
increasing the credibility of the measure and reducing the risk of self-fulfilling runs. 
To make sure the imposition of charges is effectively timed, daily liquidity disclosure to the 
supervisor is quintessential. The ideal tr igger should be automatic and based on actual 
outflows, rather than any measure than may be subject to discretionary choices by bank 
management. In addition, it is prudent to stipulate a secondary regulatory trigger, to be 
based (just as in the case of CoC o conversion) on a supervisory assessment that the bank is 
in principle solvent. This allows supervisors to fill the regulatory gap. 
Figure 6 sketches the possible responses to a potentially solvent but undercapitalized bank  
run. Currently, supervisors can only forebear or decide to voice their concerns about the 
bank status. Both options are likely to ultimately trigger runs and consequential bailouts. On 
the one hand, forbearance makes the capital deterioration continue up to the point when an 
adverse piece of news triggers the run. This was the case for SVB and, in part, Credits Suisse. 
On the other hand, raising public concerns and possibly triggering recovery measures such 
as going-concern bail-in would be helpful but remains currently not viable because of panic 
concerns. 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 6: Interim Interventions Favoring Recovery 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
Our proposals fill this regulatory gap. The supervisors will be entrusted with enhanced Pillar 
II powers, up to the performance of a going-concern bail-in. This early and effective move is 
made viable by the contingent redemption charges that are activated upon large 
withdrawals. Although awareness of contingent charges may lead to some earlier outflows 
as some depositors prefer front running, their activation will discourage escalation. 
The combination of interim measures on both capital and liquidity provides the supervisor 
with viable tools to ensuring the recovery of solvent but undercapitalized banks.  
IV. Prompting Recovery with Interim Measures 
What are the appropriate thresholds to trigger going-concern bail-in and liquidity charge? 
How can we ensure that interim measures are used in a legitimate, effective , and 
proportionate manner? These questions are crucial for our proposa l and for the bank 
prudential framework at large. In this section, we offer preliminary reflections on both 
questions. 
Principles for the Calibration of Interim Measures 
Interim measures should be triggered upon signals justifying the activation of these 
measures. This makes sense from both an economic and a legal perspective. Figure 7 displays 
four quantifiable signals that should legitimately trigger interim measures to prompt the 
recovery of solvent banks. 
13
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 16 ---
Figure 7: The Activation of Interim Measures 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
“Daily outflows ” represents the key signal for trigg ering redemption charges. These are 
targeted at stopping unnecessary escalation, so they must be automatically triggered once 
the level of outflows is excessive. “Daily outflows” is a strong signal that is easy to measure 
as long as banks appropriately and  timely disclose it to the supervisor. Charges on panic 
redemptions, such as the fees imposed by the SEC on MMF excess outflows, should be 
activated automatically to avoid any credibility issue. We argue that they are best intended 
to support recovery for viable banks. Yet they should be seen as legitimate market stabilizers 
for any bank, even ahead of a declaration of gone-concern resolution.9 
To ensure its timely activation, banks must disclose daily information on outflows to the 
supervisor (at a much higher frequency than to the market). The supervisor should activate 
the redemption charges if the bank fails to do so in response to high outflows. As charges will 
apply to excess withdrawals on any bank, they should be seen as market stabilizers without 
implying a supervisory assessment that the bank is viable.10 Otherwise, depositors bailed in 
after default could claim legal recourse against the supervisory action as misleading them. 
We propose the same calibration that the SEC designed for US MMF s. Charges are triggered 
upon the daily withdrawal of 5% of uninsured depositors. Once this contingency 
materializes, a flat 3% charge applies. In the design of the measure, it is best to steer away 
from more refined and dynamic calibration mechanisms, such as swing pricing —where the 
charge is contingent on the liquidity of banks’ assets. Its complexity does not fit the complex 
nature of banking and would jeopardize the effectiveness of the interim measures. 
 
9 Once the bank is declared insolvent and put in resolution, unpaid depositors may have some precedence on 
accumulated charge revenues. 
10 Redemption charges are not an arbitrary imposition on an  asset, rather a form of congestion charge 
legitimized by public interest in market integrity. 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
How should the revenues generated by charges be used? Given their purpose, they should 
be directed primarily at reducing run incentives besides increasing solvency. We propose 
that charges be collected in a segregated account. If the bank does not recover and gets into 
resolution in the following 30 days, the account balance should be used to mitigate the losses 
of uninsured depositors who did not withdraw —a longer maturity may be also justified. 11 
Otherwise, the account ba lance should be fully released to further reduce the bank 
leverage.12 
The activation of going-concern capital bail-in is more delicate to design and calibrate as it 
is justified only for potentially solvent banks. Banks deemed insolvent, thus with no recovery 
prospects, should go as soon as possible into resolution. We consider three different 
imperfect measures triggering going-concern bail-in, and more generally Pillar II recovery 
measures. 
We first consider the outcome of a supervisory stress -test. This represents a precise but 
infrequent measure. I t can detect early deterioration of banks ’ viability. Because of these 
characteristics, we propose that a serious shortfall in the adverse scenario or any shortfall 
in the baseline scenario should trigger an assessment on the bank’s viability. If the bank turns 
out to be solvent, the supervisor should be empowered with additional Pillar II tools for 
prompt recovery. This comprises current Pillar II tools, including payout restriction s, and 
the new, additional, power to trigger the CoCo conversion. 
Signals from stress testing should be complemented by warning signals provided by market 
value indicators (Acharya, Kulkarni, and Richardson 2011) . Although regulators are 
reluctant to use automatic market value trigger s as they are prone to be distorted, they 
should be considered as significant information.  Adverse market signals in the form of a 
sharp drop in share price or a jump in credit default swap spread should trigger a 
supervisory evaluation and empower the supervisor to prompt recovery measures (Hart and 
Zingales 2011). 
Finally, the traditional measure of book equity provides a notionally correct but in practice 
opaque signal. As it is prone to accounting manipulation, it will not signal capital 
deterioration i n time. Given its role in capital regulation, book equity should retain a 
complementary role. We propose retaining the automatic trigger based on book equity in 
line with current practice, provided its threshold be raised considerably to ensure that 
conversion will support the recovery of a solvent but undercapitalized bank. 
The regulatory trigger should be set at least at 7% of book equity. This equals the core equity 
requirement of 4.5% plus the capital conservation buffer of 2.5% that applies to all banks at 
all times and is designed to ensure that banks build up capital buffers to withstand periods 
 
11 This is consistent with the idea of reversible rewards, developed in Ben-Shahar and Bradford (2013). 
12 In this case, accounting norms should make sure that the  revenues stemming from charges are not 
categorized as “distributable items ” so that these effectively accrue to capital and cannot be channeled to 
shareholders. 
15
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 18 ---
of stress. If the bank is systemically important or is deemed particularly risky, the AT1 bonds 
should carry a correspondingly higher conversion threshold at issuance. 
A Recovery Procedure to Ensure Legitimacy and Effectiveness 
How can we be sure that interim measures we propose will be able to break the forbearance 
incentives? And how can we be sure that such intrusive measures in the management of 
solvent corporations are used in a legitimate and proportionate way? 
At first sight, these two questions point at different things; however, at a closer scrutiny, they 
turn out to be intrinsically related. The supervisor will decide to act only if its powe rs are 
widely perceived as legitimate, to avoid ex  post challenges and loss of reputation capital. 
Moreover, an attentive design in terms of legitimacy and proportionality helps ensur e that 
only solvent but undercapitalized banks are targeted by recovery measures. 
For these reasons, we propose to design a new formal recovery procedure. A bank that is 
declared solvent but undercapitalized should enter the procedure in which the supervisor 
has enhanced powers to prompt recovery. These powers should include th e AT1 going-
concern bail-in, to ensure deleverage, as well as other supervisory powers related to the risk 
profile, business model, and risk management of the bank.13 
To understand the rationale of the bank recovery procedure, it is useful to draw a functional 
comparison with the existing procedures to handle distress in nonfinancial firms. Figure 8 
summarizes this functional comparison. 
First, insolvent firms can be liquidated according to a judicial procedure to ensure the 
maximization of creditors ’ recovery. The US Chapter 7 procedure represents the most 
paradigmatic example. For banks, this is equivalent to orderly liquidation. 
Figure 8: Distress Procedures for Nonfinancial Firms and Banks 
Nonfinancial Firms Banks 
Chapter 7 – Liquidation Orderly liquidation 
Chapter 11 – Reorganization Resolution 
Private (prepacked) workouts Recovery 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
Second, if there is residual going-concern value in the firm, many legal systems favor 
reorganization procedures, aiming at striking a balance between creditors ’ rights and the 
 
13 Some of these powers are already allocated to the supervisor but are rarely used because of the forbearance 
incentives that we discuss in Section II. A formal recovery procedure will ensure that these powers are made 
effective. 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
preservation of such a going-concern value. The US “Chapter 11” procedure can be taken as 
an example. For banks, this is equivalent to resolution procedures. 
Third, firms that are solvent but face significant distress and debt overhang may want to 
engage in prepacked private workouts, engaging in debt restructuring ahead of insolvency  
(Gertner and Scharfstein 1991). The existence of this possibility is valuable as it prevents the 
deterioration of going-concern value. However, this is completely unavailable for banks 
because of the runnable nature of their liabilities. Our proposal to establish a recovery 
procedure aims at dev ising a tool that is functionally equivalent to private restructuring, 
offering a genuine possibility of recovery to undercapitalized banks. 
The detailed design of such a recovery procedure is beyond the scope of this article. Here, 
we limit ourselves to s et down three key principles of a credible and legitimate recovery 
procedure: 
(1) Legitimate activation: The supervisor should have the mandate to initiate recovery 
upon the occurrence of reliable signals, such as large outflows, stress  test results, 
market-value indicators, auditors ’ assessment, book value of equity. Recovery can 
initiate if the “solvent but undercapitalized” status of the bank is signaled by more 
than one of these heterogeneous indicators. 
(2) Short-term mandate: The supervisor should no t act as de facto management , to 
ensure proportionality and limit legal risk. Therefore, we propose a short recovery 
window of 30–60 days. 
(3) Availability of limited emergency liquidity assistance (ELA): This will ensure the 
credibility and feasibility of the  recovery. This is in line with the central bank 
mandate in liquidity provision as the recovery should take place far from the point 
of nonviability. At the same time, providing ELA also reinforces the legitimacy of the 
additional recovery powers granted to the supervisor.14 
V. Comparing Solutions by Risk Allocation 
The experience of March 2023 has reignited the debate over banking regulation reforms, 
such as widening deposit insurance or higher capital and liquidity requirements. These 
proposals focus on ex ante solutions, the equivalent of increasing the height of dams of 
expanding flood reservoirs. We argue that such reforms do not entirely capture the dynamic 
evolution of bank distress that we depicted in the previous sections, and that contingent, 
interim, measures (the storing of sandbags by the dam) may need more attention. 
 
14 This is in line with the experience of Credit Suisse, where the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority 
was empowered to write down AT1 CoCos because of the ELA granted to the bank. See Appendix B for further 
details. 
17
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 9 summarizes  the main reform options including state -contingent options and 
highlighting how the allocation of risk affects moral hazard and run incentives, trading off 
liquidity, capital, and fiscal costs (Perotti 2023b). 
Figure 9: Potential Reforms to Strengthen Deposit Stability 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration. 
Deposit insurance and higher capital norms have the strongest effects and highest cost and 
would face extensive resistance. The advocacy for stricter capital norms is as noble and well-
grounded as politically unviable. The outcome of the Basel Endgame negotiations and the 
likely impact of the new Trump administration demonstrate the complexity of such an 
ambitious goal (Davies 2024).  
On the other side of the “ex ante” measure spectrum, the idea of full deposit insurance gained 
support in both academic and policy circles  in the aftermath of the SVB and Credit Suisse 
collapses (FDIC 2023, 44) . Full deposit insurance was offered f or SVB ’s uninsured 
depositors, accounting for a staggering 94% of the SVB deposit base, on an ad hoc basis after 
the “financial stability” exception was triggered. This, indeed, stopped the run but reinforced 
bailout expectations on all banks. Based on our  analysis, the impact of expanding deposit 
insurance to currently uninsured depositors would have extremely negative effects on risk 
incentives, resulting in ambiguous effects on the bank ’s insolvency risk. Excessive risk 
incentives and related bailout expectations would make recovery impossible. 
Interim measures targeted at going-concern preservation and recovery may be embedded 
as prompt responses containing the escalation of runs. This calls for solid pre -resolution 
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 21 ---
regulatory powers to activate pricing and gating in response to uninsured runs on banks 
deemed solvent. 
In any run, allowing outflows at par value directly dilutes those who do not to withdraw. As 
a result, once outflows start , all depositors have an incentive to run if they expect others to 
do the same. To de -escalate run incentives , it is critical to penalize or slow down rapid 
outflows at the right time. Thus, the choice of the precise volume of outflows that would 
activate the temporary charges is quite an important  calibration. Just as in the case of 
contingent conversion of AT1 debt, it is highly advisable to introduce a regulatory trigger 
that may be activated at an early stage when banks deemed to be solvent become exposed to 
rumors that may trigger an escalation. Comparable norms have a lready been applied to 
money market fund s. This is a significant precedent since MMFs were the main historical 
destination of corporate cash pools and can serve as a natural benchmark. Critically, modest 
charges can maintain access to safe liquidity for businesses at a modest price and protect 
taxpayers from avoidable unnecessary runs.  
Revenues from occasional redemption charges may be assigned to aid the process of 
recovery. Assigning them to the bankruptcy estate will contribute to a general if modest 
relief. If the bank suffering outflows ultimately recovers, they will contribute to the  
recapitalization process. If the bank ultimately fails, charges will be a bail-in contribution to 
the resolution process. An alternative would be to preassign these revenues to back undrawn 
uninsured deposits, in default or possibly even in a direct trans fer after the charges are 
suspended. A direct rollover benefit will further reduce run incentives and back the recovery 
process. Paradoxically, the rollover premium will increase in the scale of outflows, further 
containing the strategic escalation driving a self-fulfilling run. 
Charges are likely to affect run incentives in terms of their timing. Some depositors are alert 
and may withdraw earlier when the chance of charges arises, even when they do not need 
immediate liquidity. Indeed, the anticipation of gates will accelerate outflows, with the effect 
that charges will be activated promptly. The trade -off is between faster but contained runs, 
versus the usual buildup of outflows progressively escalating then bursting into an 
uncontrollable final run. 
An al ternative interim measure proposal is to mandatorily require banks to pre -position 
collateral against their runnable liabilities in times of stress  (Barr 2024; G -30 2024) . 
However, this proposal seems to run in to all the problems and limitations currently 
preventing recovery. Based on the analyses of Sections II and III, it is reasonable to think that 
pre-positioning requirements will be triggered too late or be too lax, with considerable 
difficulty in enforcement to prevent adverse signals and stigma. More over, the valuation of 
collateral in times of stress is delicate and, in systemic events, can result in sizeable risk for 
the central banks, with indirect fiscal effects. This would represent yet a new form of bailout. 
Finally, the requirement to pre-position collateral against all runnable liabilities may restrict 
too much banks’ abilities to engage in socially beneficial intermediation. However, moderate 
pre-positioning requirements represent an excellent complement to our proposals, 
especially in relation to the ELA necessary to finance recovery.  
19
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 22 ---
VI. Conclusions 
The sequence of distressed bank runs in March 2023 has made painfully clear that 
supervisors have no effective tools and poor incentives to take early actions out of fear of 
triggering runs. We have advanced the notion of a strengthened regime of contingent 
intervention aimed at avoiding unnecessary default ( in loco bancaruptae ) and giv ing a 
chance of recovery for banks deemed to be in principle viable. The contingent measures 
involve targeting run in centives by preemptive partial bail -in of investors or uninsured 
depositors, acting as automatic stabilizers triggered by large outflows. Credible preventive 
measures pressure bank shareholders for a timely response, limit forbearance, and improve 
the chances of a bank’s recovery over its resolution. Contingent measures complement ex 
ante capital and liquidity buffers and will not rely as much on book equity measures. They 
are vastly preferable to an expansion of deposit insurance for uninsured corporate deposits 
that would lead to higher moral hazard and risk creation. Deposits serve a primary safety 
role for households, so household deposit insurance is a legitimate public goal. On the other 
hand, businesses can bear a modest amount of price risk on their cash pools and have 
historically held cash in MMFs for a better yield at a modest price risk. As a final piece of 
evidence, almost $300 billion in corporate deposits shifted in March–April 2023 from banks 
into MMFs, which are subject to redemption fees (Masters, Clarfelt, and Duguid 2023). 
  
20
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 23 ---
VII. References 
Acharya, Viral V., Nirupama Kulkarni, and Matthew Richardson. 2011. “Capital, Contingent 
Capital, and Liquidity Requirements.” In Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the 
New Architecture of Global Finance, edited by Viral V. Acharya, Thomas F. Cooley Matthew 
Richardson, and Ingo Walter, 143–180. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons 
Admati, Anat, and Martin Hellwig. 2024. The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with 
Banking and What to Do about It - New and Expanded Edition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 
Ahnert, Toni, and Co-Pierre Georg. 2018. “Information Contagion and Systemic Risk.” 
Journal of Financial Stability 35 (April): 159–71.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2017.05.009 
Armantier, Olivier, Eric Ghysels, Asani Sarkar, and Jeffrey Shrader. 2015. “Discount Window 
Stigma during the 2007–2008 Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial Economics 118, no. 2: 
317–35.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2015.08.006 
Barr, Michael S. 2024. “On Building a Resilient Regulatory Framework” Speech delivered at 
the Central Banking in the Post-Pandemic Financial System 28th Annual Financial Markets 
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Fernandina Beach, FL, May 20, 2024.”  
https://fedinprint.org/item/fedgsq/98259 
Ben-Shahar, Omri, and Anu Bradford. 2013. “Reversible Rewards.” American Law and 
Economics Review 15, no. 1: 156–86.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/aler/ahs018 
Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Kermit L. Schoenholtz. 2023. “Making Banking Safe.” CEPR 
Discussion Paper No. 18302.  
https://cepr.org/publications/dp18302 
Chan, Stephanie, and Sweder van Wijnbergen. 2014. “CoCos, Contagion and Systemic Risk.” 
CEPR Discussion Papers, 10960. Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper No. 14-110/VI/DSF 
79, October 29, 2014.  
https://ideas.repec.org/p/tin/wpaper/20140110.html 
Cookson, J. Anthony, Corbin Fox, Javier Gil-Bazo, Juan Felipe Imbet, and Christoph Schiller. 
2023. “Social Media as a Bank Run Catalyst.” Université Paris-Dauphine Research Paper No. 
4422754, June 24, 2023.  
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4422754 
Credit Suisse. 2017. Proposed Offering of CHF 200 million 3.875% Perpetual Tier 1 
Contingent Write-down Capital Notes. March 20, 2017. 
http://www.kccllc.net/document/8871900230324000000000001 
21
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 24 ---
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström. 2020. “The Information View of Financial 
Crises.” Annual Review of Financial Economics 12 (November): 39–65. 
https://www.annualreviews.org/content/journals/10.1146/annurev-financial-110118-
123041 
Davies, Daniel. 2024. “Endgame for Endgame? Trump vs Basel III.” Financial Times, 
November 14, 2024.  
https://www.ft.com/content/899f499e-2249-40f8-9d0c-fa72ffb98869 
Dewatripont, Mathias, Peter Praet, and André Sapir. 2023. “The Silicon Valley Bank 
Collapse: Prudential Regulation Lessons for Europe and the World.” VoxEU Column, March 
20, 2023.  
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/silicon-valley-bank-collapse-prudential-regulation-
lessons-europe-and-world 
Diamond, Douglas W, and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and 
Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 3): 401–19.  
https://doi.org/10.1086/261155 
Ennis, Huberto M. 2019. “Interventions in Markets with Adverse Selection: Implications for 
Discount Window Stigma.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 51, no. 7: 1737–64. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jmcb.12583 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 2023. “Options for Deposit Insurance 
Reform.” May 1, 2023. 
https://www.fdic.gov/analysis/options-deposit-insurance-reform 
FINMA. 2023. “Lessons Learned from the CS Crisis.” December 19, 2023. 
https://www.finma.ch/en/~/media/finma/dokumente/dokumentencenter/myfinma/fin
ma-publikationen/cs-bericht/20231219-finma-bericht-
cs.pdf?sc_lang=en&hash=3F13A6D9398F2F55B90347A64E269F44 
Gambacorta, Leonardo, Tommaso Oliviero, and Hyun Song Shin. 2023. “Low Price-to-Book 
Ratios and Bank Dividend Payouts: Economic Policy Implications.” Economic Policy 38, no. 
115: 675–701.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/epolic/eiad028 
Gertner, Robert, and David Scharfstein. 1991. “A Theory of Workouts and the Effects of 
Reorganization Law.” Journal of Finance 46, no. 4: 1189–1222. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1991.tb04615.x 
Glasserman, Paul, and Enrico Perotti. 2017. “The Unconvertible CoCo Bonds.” In Achieving 
Financial Stability: Challenges to Prudential Regulation, edited by Douglas D. Evanoff, 
George G. Kaufman, Agnese Leonello, and Simone Manganelli, 317–29. Singapore: World 
Scientific Publishing Co. 
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordoñez. 2020. “Fighting Crises with Secrecy.” American 
22
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 25 ---
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12, no. 4: 218–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1257/mac.20190169  
Gorton, Gary B., Chase P. Ross, and Sharon Y. Ross. 2024. “Where Collateral Sleeps.” S&P 
Global Market Intelligence, October 29, 2024. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4923083 
Group of Thirty (G-30). 2024. “Bank Failures and Contagion: Lender of Last Resort, 
Liquidity, and Risk Management.” Report of the G-30 Working Group on the 2023 Banking 
Crisis, January 2024. 
https://gceps.princeton.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/wp329_Dudley_G30_Lessons-
23-Crisis_RPT.pdf 
Hart, Oliver, and Luigi Zingales. 2011. “A New Capital Regulation for Large Financial 
Institutions.” American Law and Economics Review 13, no. 2: 453–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/aler/ahr001 
Heider, Florian, Jan Pieter Krahnen, Loriana Pelizzon, Jonas Schlegel, and Tobias Tröger. 
2023. “European Lessons from Silicon Valley Bank Resolution: A Plea for a Comprehensive 
Demand Deposit Protection Scheme (CDDPS).” Leibniz Institute for Financial Research, 
SAFE Policy Letter No. 98, March 2023.  
https://ideas.repec.org/p/zbw/safepl/98.html 
Jiang, Erica Xuewei, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru. 2024. “Monetary 
Tightening and US Bank Fragility in 2023: Mark-to-Market Losses and Uninsured Depositor 
Runs?” Journal of Financial Economics 159 (September): 103899.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103899 
Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2008. “Rethinking Capital 
Regulation.” In “Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System,” Proceedings of the 
Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson 
Hole, WY, August 21–23, 2008: 431–71.  
https://www.kansascityfed.org/Jackson%20Hole/documents/3175/2008-
KashyapRajanStein031209.pdf 
Martino, Edoardo D. 2019. “Bail-inable Securities and Financial Contracting: Can Contracts 
Discipline Bankers?” European Journal of Risk Regulation 10, no. 1: 164–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/err.2019.5 
———. 2020. “The Bail-in beyond Unpredictability: Creditors’ Incentives and Market 
Discipline.” European Business Organization Law Review 21, no. 4: 789–828. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40804-020-00188-7 
———. 2021. “Towards an Optimal Composition of Bail-inable Debtholders?” Journal of 
Corporate Law Studies 21, no. 2: 321–64.  
https://doi.org/10.1080/14735970.2021.1908808 
23
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 26 ---
Martino, Edoardo D., Casimiro A. Nigro, and Tom Vos. 2024. “CoCos in Europe: What Is 
Wrong – and How to Fix It?” EBI Working Paper Series No. 169, May 13, 2024. 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4810761 
Martino, Edoardo D., and Katarzyna M. Parchimowicz. 2021. “Go Preventive or Go Home–
the Double Nature of MREL.” European Company and Financial Law Review 18, no. 4: 608–
39.  
https://doi.org/10.1515/ecfr-2021-0023 
Martynova, Natalya, and Enrico Perotti. 2018. “Convertible Bonds and Bank Risk-Taking.” 
In “Banking and Regulation: The Next Frontier,” edited by Mathias Dewaitropont and Diana 
Hancock, special issue, Journal of Financial Intermediation 35 (July): 61–80.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2018.01.002 
Martynova, Natalya, Enrico Perotti, and Javier Suarez. 2022. “Capital Forbearance in the 
Bank Recovery and Resolution Game.” Journal of Financial Economics 146, no. 3: 884–904.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2022.09.006 
Masters, Brooke, Harriet Clarfelt, and Kate Duguid. 2023. “Money Market Funds Swell by 
More than $286bn amid Deposit Flight.” Financial Times, March 26, 2023. 
https://www.ft.com/content/032523bc-3b92-4b94-b6b8-ebbe1d606b2c 
Matta, Rafael, and Enrico Perotti. 2024. “Pay, Stay, or Delay? How to Settle a Run.” Review of 
Financial Studies 37, no. 4: 1368–1407.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhad084 
Matta, Rafael, Remo Oostdam, and Enrico Perotti. Forthcoming. “Contingent Fees to Contain 
Bank Runs.” University of Amsterdam working paper.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5464/ 
McLaughlin, Susan. 2024. “Lessons for the Discount Window from the March 2023 Bank 
Failures.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, no. 2: 72–84. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/3/ 
Ohlrogge, Michael. Forthcoming. “Why Have Uninsured Depositors Become de Facto 
Insured?” New York University Law Review 100 (forthcoming). 
Perotti, Enrico. 2023a. “The Swiss Authorities Enforced a Legitimate Going Concern 
Conversion.” VoxEU Column, March 22, 2023.  
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/swiss-authorities-enforced-legitimate-going-concern-
conversion 
———. 2023b. “Measures to Prevent Runs on Solvent Banks.” VoxEU Column, July 1, 2023.  
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/measures-prevent-runs-solvent-banks 
  
24
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 27 ---
Perotti, Enrico, and Javier Suarez. 2011. “A Pigovian Approach to Liquidity Regulation.” In 
“Special Issue: The Real and Financial Effects of Basel III,” International Journal of Central 
Banking 7, no. 4: 3–41.  
https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb11q4a1.htm 
  
25
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 28 ---
VIII. Appendixes 
Appendix A: The EU Recovery and Resolution Framework 
The European Union ( EU) Recovery and Resolution Directive is arguably misnamed. It is 
largely focused on containing bailouts through bail -in upon default, rather than offer ing 
options for timely recovery. The lack of effective recovery tools also endangers the credible 
implementation of gone-concern resolution tools when necessary, increasing the regulatory 
gap (Martino 2020; Martino 2021). National resistance has undermined the formal 
resolution process, bypassing it by declaring standard bankruptcy (Dewatripont, Praet, and 
Sapir 2023) . In the U nited States, the F ederal Deposit Insurance Corporation is the sole 
authority and benefits from more instruments. However, in practice , it has been ultimately 
forced into a bailout. The amount of uninsured demandable deposits bailed in since 2007 in 
the US is exactly zero. 
In principle, Basel III encour aged bank issuance of contingent convertible (CoCo) debt as a 
form of pre -issued equity capital to be used ahead of distress  (Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein 
2008). Conversion of debt into equity ensure s a sharp drop in leverage upon early signs of 
distress, reducing risk incentives and giving a chance of recovery ahead of resolution 
(Martynova and Perotti 2018) . It was thus intended as a form of going-concern bail-in, 
alleviating solvency concerns at a c ritical time.15 This potential has not been realized in EU 
legislation. It admits CoCo debt to count as additional Tier 1 (AT1) capital, although its equity 
conversion would occur once book equity falls to a risibly low level (just above 5%, when the 
bank is quite insolvent). In addition, the choice of a book trigger for conversion requires the 
bank to publicly recognize huge losses that certify near insolvency, a guarantee for massive 
runs. EU supervisors have shown no intent to ever call for a conversion that would highlight 
such losses. In their view, any public hint of undercapitalization may trigger an unstoppable 
run (Chan and van Wijnbergen 2014). This is a justifiable concern if conversion takes place 
too late (that is, at a book equity trigger way too low) and there are no safeguards in place to 
contain runs. 
As a result, no CoCo bonds have ever converted in the EU ahead of default. In actual default, 
they were suffered losses like any other bond. In fact, not a single coupon has ever been 
suspended, as regulators feared triggering panic. They should be then treated as gone-
concern instruments and removed from AT1 status. Overall, EU CoCo bond prices have 
reflected zero conversion risk since 2016, when the EU authorities failed to suspend a single 
coupon on a Deutsche  Bank CoCo bond (Glasserman and Perotti 2017). Clearly, the market 
no longer believed in any going-concern loss absorption. Finally, virtually all CoCo 
instruments so far have been called at the first possible redemption window (usually fi ve 
years), making the instruments perpetual only in name. In conclusion, there are no effective 
tools in EU legislation enabling a solvent but undercapitalized bank a chance to recover, 
outside of public bank recapitalization. As a result, forbearance has been the general 
outcome. 
 
15 CoCo bonds have not been issued in the US as they do not qualify as debt for fiscal purposes. 
26
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 29 ---
Appendix B: Lessons from the Credit Suisse AT1 Going-concern Bail-in 
In contrast to the European Union bank capital legislation, Switzerland adopted a much more 
vigorous approach on additional Tier 1 (AT1) going-concern bail-in, with the express goal of 
avoiding costly bailouts such as the UBS rescue in 2009. The legislation imposed larger 
capital buffer and higher contingent convertible (CoCo) debt conversion triggers at or above 
7% of book equity (thus ensuring a full capital con servation buffer upon conversion). 
Critically, Swiss banks issuing CoCos were required to include a “discretionary trigger” in the 
bond indenture (Martino 2019; Martino, Nigro, and Vos 2024). This enhanced Pillar II power 
enabled a successful going-concern bail-in operation for Credit Suisse, which averted a fiscal 
costly default and a messy resolution process (Perotti 2023a). 
Specifically, the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority ( FINMA) was empowered to 
force the conversion without a formal accounting restatement of book equity, upon a 
“viability event” that would have led to default even when the bank was deemed in principle 
solvent (as Credit Suisse was assessed to be a few days be fore conversion). The standard 
clause in Credit Suisse CoCo indentures states that conversion will be activate if: 
(A) the Regulator has notified CSG that it has determined that a write-down of the Notes, 
together with the conversion or write down/off of holders’ claims in respect of any and 
all other Progressive Component Capital Instruments, Buffer Capital Instruments, Tier 1 
Instruments and Tier 2 Instruments that, pursuant to their terms or by operation of law, 
are capable of being converted into equity  or written down/off at that time is, because 
customary measures to improve CSG’s [Credit Suisse Group] capital adequacy are at the 
time inadequate or unfeasible, an essential requirement to prevent CSG from becoming 
insolvent, bankrupt or unable to pay a material part of its debts as they fall due, or from 
ceasing to carry on its business; or (B) customary measures to improve CSG ’s capital 
adequacy being at the time inadequate or unfeasible, CSG has received an irrevocable 
commitment of extraordinary suppo rt from the Public Sector (beyond customary 
transactions and arrangements in the ordinary course) that has the effect of improving 
CSG’s capital adequacy and without which, in the determination of the Regulator, CSG 
would have become insolvent, bankrupt, unable to pay a material part of its debts as they 
fall due or unable to carry on its business. (Credit Suisse 2017, 10-11) 
In other words, the regulatory trigger was authorized as soon as failure to convert would 
imply some fiscal risks for the Swiss treas ury. This is indeed the principle for a rigorous 
preventive bail-in procedure, focused on recovery. 
The Credit Suisse experience has a valuable lesson on the necessity of legal clarity. Credit 
Suisse had experienced for quite some time a steady deteriorati on in value and investor 
confidence. Yet the Swiss regulator FINMA chose to delay activating a conversion, even 
though its need was already evident —as FINMA’s recent report attests to  (FINMA, 2023). 
Supervisors hesitated for at least two years, arguing on the conditions under which they had 
a clear legal right to activate the regulatory trigger. 
It took an explicit act of legislation by the Swiss Parliament to firmly establish FINMA’s right 
of activation. At the time , Credit Suisse had already been forced t o request emergency 
27
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 30 ---
liquidity assistance (ELA) from the Swiss National Bank, backed by the fiscal capacity of the 
Swiss federal state. 
The Swiss Parliament passed in an emergency meeting a law clarifying that such a n ELA 
operation indeed represented a case of fiscal exposure, thus enabling the regulator to act. 
This led for the first time to a going-concern recapitalization of AT1 bonds, and to bank 
recovery rather than resolution.16 
It is important to stress that the final outcome was indeed the intent of the law. The specific 
contractual formulation of the Credit Suisse AT1 CoCo debentures implied that creditors end 
up being fully wiped out while shareholders retained a stake in the enterprise. Such was not 
the explicit intent of the law, rather a private choice to designate the outcome of going-
concern bail-in as a complete debt cancellation, a simpler legal construction than the creation 
of a new equity interest. Because of the conf usion created by the wipeout, in the future , all 
CoCo conversions could consist of (at least partially) a transformation into equity capital. 
It is important to learn from the experience of this sole example of a successful (if chaotic) 
going-concern bail-in. 
  
 
16 CoCo bondholders who were wiped out are currently suing FINMA, disputing whether the bank “has received 
an irrevocable commitment of extraordinary support from the Public Sector” as required by the bond indenture 
(Credit Suisse 2017, 10-11).  
28
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 31 ---
Appendix C: When Is a Bank Undercapitalized? 
Preventive bail-in measures must be targeted at banks deemed solvent but undercapitalized. 
If a bank is insolvent, resolution (ideally with adequate risk -absorbing capacity) is the sole 
legitimate policy. So, a credible and fair recovery regime requires a definition of a legitimate 
candidate bank that would benefit from going-concern bail-in measures, not least to stand 
legal scrutiny. 
The Basel regulatory framework almost exclusively focuses on adjusted bo ok equity 
measures. The use of market values has been resisted on the ground of potential 
manipulation of trigger indicators. 17 Yet accounting figures are at best past and infrequent 
measures of net value, so interim supervisory assessment s of bank solvency are necessary. 
Stress tests are the standard method to assess resilience under adverse scenarios and define 
the degree of capitalization. Yet book equity is a measure of current assets, while the value 
of a bank includes future prospects driven by its de posit franchise. Stress tests implicitly 
factor in such values, which may be positive or negative. 
From an economic perspective, a bank with inadequate equity may be considered solvent if 
it has a viable business model, especially if its losses are on safe  asset holdings so that the 
downside risk of credit losses is limited. Such a bank may be at the mercy of run expectations, 
as both the value of its assets and the value of its deposit franchise cannot be realized in a 
quick sale. This is the category of b anks that would benefit from going-concern conversion. 
A contingent bail-in favors recovery as long as it is coupled with tools to prevent panics and 
generate runs, such as the liquidity charge we propose. 
In contrast, a bank with the same level of book eq uity value but with sizeable losses, low 
deposit franchise value, and very poor future prospects is a prime candidate for resolution. 
In this case, a going-concern bail-in would not create the conditions for recovery and should 
be seen as unfair treatment of some investors. A consistent and legally binding definition is 
needed to justify the additional supervisory powers. 
Beyond capital requirements, the post -2008 regulation also introduced the total loss-
absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements to ensure res olution without bailout. TLAC is the 
minimum stock of bail -inable capital, currently set to 18% of risk -weighted assets for 
systemic banks. 18 It comprises common equity, additional Tier 1 capital instruments , and 
long-term, subordinated, unsecured debt that will be wiped out upon insolvency. These 
requirements are crucial for an orderly resolution of banks that does not rely on a fiscal 
backstop. High risk-absorbing capacity has also an effect on risk appetite as they decreased 
risk shifting incentives. However, the designated function for TLAC  and minimum 
requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities ( MREL) capital is to ensure bail -in in a 
gone-concern resolution, so they have no direct counterpart in a recovery process. 
 
17 This view is also consistent with the idea that banks’ stability requires some level of opacity (Dang, Gorton, 
and Holmström 2020). 
18 TLAC rules were transposed in the EU as the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities. 
29
Containing Runs on Solvent Banks Martino and Perotti

--- Page 32 ---
The recovery measures we propose should be seen as a recovery-aimed complement to the 
resolution and loss -absorbency requirements. They parallel the mandate to the resolution 
authority to convert or write down TLAC  liabilities once the banks become insolvent, or to 
impose moratoria on withdrawals to avoid runs very close to insolvency. 
 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
 
 
30
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1