--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 3 
2025 
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity 
Transformation Transformation 
Francesca Carapella 
Federal Reserve Board of Governors 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Carapella, Francesca (2025) "CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity 
Transformation," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 3, 1-19. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1665 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss3/1 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote 
The views and opinions expressed in this paper are my own and do not represent those of the Federal 
Reserve System or its staff. I am grateful to Melissa Leistra, David Mills, and Alexandros Vardoulakis for 
careful feedback on the article and to Lucia Gurrieri for excellent research assistance. I also wish to thank 
Garth Baughman, Jin-Wook Chang, Andrew Danzig, Jean Flemming, Nathan Foley-Fisher, Mike Kiley, David 
Lowe, Borghan Narajabad, Romina Ruprecht, and Chiara Scotti for their useful suggestions. 
This article is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/
vol7/iss3/1

--- Page 3 ---
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation 
and Maturity Transformation  
Francesca Carapella1 
Abstract 
This paper analyzes the implications of different models of intermediation, clearing , and 
settlement of central bank digital currency (CBDC) for the ability of the financial system to 
create money and, through it, to possibly affect financial stability. Only two models have the 
potential to limit the private sectors’ ability to create money: a model where the central bank 
directly opens accounts with the public and a model where the central bank allows 
intermediaries to perform only custodial activities in CBDC. Under any other intermediation 
model, money can be created inside the financial system by the intermediaries providing 
payment services associated with CBDC holdings. However, the creation of inside money 
does not necessarily affect financial stability per se ; it does so indirectly by facilitating 
activities linked to maturity transformation. 
Keywords: banking, central bank digital currency (CBDC), financial stability, payment 
systems 
JEL Classifications: E42, E51, G20
 
1 Principal Economist, Federal Reserve  Board of Governors , Francesca.Carapella@frb.gov. The views and 
opinions expressed in this paper are my own and do not represent those of the Federal Reserve System or its 
staff. I am grateful to Melissa Leistra, David Mills, and Alexandros Vardoulakis for careful feedback on the article 
and to Lucia Gurrieri for excellent research assistance. I also wish to th ank Garth Baughman, Jin-Wook Chang, 
Andrew Danzig, Jean Flemming, Nathan Foley -Fisher, Mike Kiley, David Lowe, Borghan Narajabad, Romina 
Ruprecht, and Chiara Scotti for their useful suggestions. 
1

--- Page 4 ---
I. Introduction  
Recent technological advances have sparked a wave of new private sector financial products 
and services, such as digital assets and payment applications, leading central banks around 
the globe to explore the pot ential economic value and risks of issuing a central bank digital 
currency (CBDC). Rules governing the distribution of CBDC and the provision of financial 
services linked to CBDC are likely to shape the future of our financial system with respect to 
its potential and its intrinsic fragility. 
This paper describes various models for settlement of CBDC balances and for the integration 
of banks and other financial institutions in the provision of financial services linked to CBDC. 
Settlement is an act that discharges obligations of funds or securities transfers between two 
or more parties in accordance with the terms of the underlying contract. 2 For example, the 
seller transfers securities to the buyer and the buyer transfers money to the seller. 
The settlement models analyzed in this paper differ by their ability to support two important 
activities typically performed by financial institutions: money creation and maturity 
transformation. Key elements of traditional payment systems, such as real time gross 
settlement and deferred net settlement, play a crucial role in determining the extent to which 
a CBDC settlement model will allow financial institutions to provide liquidity to the economy 
via money creation and to conduct maturity transformation —a profitable activity that can, 
however, undermine financial stability.3 
The economic mechanism linking CBDC to maturity transformation  works through  the 
execution of CBDC payment orders. Payments can often be executed by saving on the amount 
to be transferred back and forth among trading partners , for example by aggregating and 
netting payment requests before settlement . In doing so,  the entity performing settlement 
does not need to hold as much CBDC as required by every individual payment order. Hence, 
a payment provider would be able to invest the CBDC received from clients placing payment 
requests but not transferred for settlement. A payment provider would be able to perform 
maturity transformation.  
In our financial system , the mechanism just described is already operating through central 
bank reserves. As a form of  central bank money, reserves carry no credit risk and  are thus 
typically preferred in settlement. However, c entral bank reserves can be held  only by 
institutions eligible for a n account at the central bank, typically banks.4 A CBDC would also 
be central bank money. The introduction of  a CBDC might introduce additional agents  
besides banks  that can hold a digital version of central bank money, thus creating other 
 
2 See Committee on Payments and Market Structure (2016). 
3 While this paper highlights ideas linked to financial stress, it focuses on normal rather than crisis times. 
Therefore, stress episodes like runs on banks are not specifically discussed.  
4 In the United States, a list of depository institutions eligible for an account is available through the Federal 
Reserve Master Account and Services Database. 
2
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 5 ---
entities that could execute payment orders, in turn facilitating maturity transformation. With 
maturity transformation having almost always been at the root of the financial cris es of the 
past 200 years, the design of resilient payment systems for CBDC should account for t he 
emergence of new channels that can amplify financial stress by introducing novel points of 
fragility within and outside the financial system, as some of these entities are often fintech 
companies. 
The analysis shows that CBDC settlement models relying e xclusively on the central bank to 
handle account activity, such as maintaining and updating balances, preclude financial 
institutions from creating money and operating with a fractional reserve system for CBDC. 
Therefore, such settlement models would precl ude financial institutions from performing 
maturity transformation through their CBDC -related activities.5 As a result, while financial 
institutions may still create money and engage in maturity transformation through their 
reserve balances at the central  bank, the introduction of a CBDC would not represent an 
additional channel by which money creation and maturity transformation would be feasible. 
On the other hand, the analysis also shows that CBDC settlement models allowing for the 
provision of deposit and payment services by intermediaries can enable both money 
creation and maturity transformation through CBDC -related products and services. Hence, 
such settlement models would allow CBDC to introduce an additional channel through which 
financial institutions can engage in money creation and maturity transformation, possibly 
complementary to the channels that are currently active. As a result, the choice of settlement 
models for any potential CBDC can play a key role in shaping the future of our financial 
system and have far-reaching consequences for financial stability. 
This paper is organized as follows: I first describe the process of money creation by financial 
institutions; second, we discuss maturity and liquidity transformation and their relationship 
with fractional reserve banking. Last, we define CBDC and describe various settlement 
models for CBDC, analyzing how each of them might or might not enable money creation and 
maturity transformation. 
II. Money Creation 
Money creation is the process that allows the value of transactions in an economy to exceed 
the stock of central bank money in a unit of time. 6 In other words, money is created 
endogenously in an economy when the economy’s ability to pay is larger than its stock of 
money (that is,  cash and  reserves at the central bank). How is this feasible? Through the 
provision of payment services by financial institutions when the payment orders stemming 
 
5 This settlement model, however, is inconsistent with the design features outlined in the Federal Reserve 
Board’s CBDC white paper, which states that a potential US CBDC would be intermediated (Fed 2022a). 
6 This note refers to money in its strictest form of payment instrument  or medium of exchange. It should be 
noted, however, that several financial and nonfinancial institutions can be thought of as de facto engaging in 
activities that affect the economy’s ability to borrow or fund productive projects. 
3
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella

--- Page 6 ---
from these services do not necessarily rely on central bank money to be settled. Two types 
of payment services satisfy this condition.7 
The first type of payment service allowing for money creation is a circulating liability issued 
by a bank or payment provider. Such liability may circulate in the economy without ever 
being returned to the issuer in exchange for central bank money. For example, a check could 
be endorsed and circulate, to the extent that the payees themselves expect to be able to spend 
it, or to deposit it at their own bank, or to receive central bank money if they return it to the 
issuing bank.8 The check would be used like cash in this situation. Thus, it would be a form 
of money issued by private institutions, produced inside the financial system, and known as 
inside money, as opposed to central bank money, also known as outside money.9 
Second, payment orders can be netted across a network of institutions before being 
executed. The most common example of such netting activity occurs among banks. Bank 
depositors can use their deposits to settle transactions without the need to withdraw the ir 
funds, rather by transferring claims on their funds deposited at the bank. Such funds may not 
be physically at the bank (in the form of either cash or reserves) as the bank may have 
invested them in loans or other assets. The claims on depositors’ funds  at the bank are the 
bank’s obligations to pay, so they are claims on the bank’s assets up to the face value of the 
claims. Consider a check, for example. This check can be ( a) deposited at the payee’s own 
bank or ( b) returned to the issuing bank in exchan ge for central bank money (cash or 
reserves). In the first case, the bank where the check is deposited can return the check to the 
issuing bank and request payment in central bank money. However, when sufficiently many 
banks engage in check issuance, they can choose to net each other’s checks without the need 
to transfer central bank money back and forth to each other for each check. Because check 
payments are settled by netting obligations across banks, there is no need for the issuing 
bank to hold central  bank money in the same amount as the checks it issued —unless the 
issuing bank is certain that none of its depositors will deposit checks issued by other banks, 
as those checks would be obligations of those other banks toward the issuing bank. More 
generally, if sufficiently many banks provide payment services associated with deposits, 
such banks can multilaterally net each other’s obligations: banks’ outgoing payments are 
netted against incoming payments from other banks. As a result, full backing of outgo ing 
payments by central bank money ( that is, cash and reserves) is not necessary. Such netting 
of banks’ checks effectively generates money. Each dollar on a check issued by a bank and 
settled by a process of netting obligations across banks is a dollar of  money created by the 
 
7 The most basic way in whic h deposits are used to settle transactions is by allowing depositors to withdraw 
the money that they deposited at their bank and then use that money to pay. This arrangement requires that 
sufficient central bank money (that is, cash) be kept at the bank to back one-to-one the value of the transactions 
for which deposits are paying. In this case, the provision of payment services does not result in money creation. 
8 This used to happen in the Free Banking Era, whe n banknotes issued by individual banks circul ated even 
outside the area where the issuing bank ’s main business was located. Some banknotes were crossing states ’ 
boundaries, for instance—see Gorton (1999) and Ales et al. (2008). 
9 For a definition and discussion of inside and outside money see, among many, Mills (2007), Cavalcanti and 
Wallace (1999), Marimon, Nicolini, and Teles (2003). 
4
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 7 ---
banking system, that is,  inside money. Additional examples of such process of money 
creation are historical clearinghouses, as well as central counterparties.10 
We should note that there is a misperception among some economists about money being 
created out of thin air, also known as the fountain pen money view of banking.11 According to 
this view, banks create money by extending a loan to a borrower, as they open an account 
for the borrower with funds available to be spent in the same amount as the value of the loan. 
Because the borrower can make payments using the funds in such account, the fountain pen 
money view of banking is that banks create money by making loans. However, this is not 
quite accurate. Banks create money by providin g deposit accounts to their borrowers only 
to the extent that the payment orders made from such accounts are netted against incoming 
payments from other banks, without the need for central bank money. 12 The bank 
originating the loan will need central bank money for any outgoing payments it is unable to 
net. This need for central bank money, or outside money, implies that the bank originating 
the loan will not be creating inside money simply by opening an account for the borrower. 
Hence, the bank will not be creating money out of thin air. 
III. Maturity and Liquidity Transformation and Fractional 
Reserve Banking 
Financial institutions perform maturity transformation when the maturity of their financing 
does not match the maturity of their investments, for example by promising their funding 
providers short-term repayments and investing the borrowed funds into longer-term assets. 
Financial institutions perform liquidity transformation wh en they invest in illiquid assets 
and raise funding by issuing liabilities that are broadly regarded as liquid by financial 
markets, often owing to the issuer’s promise to act to preserve such liquidity. The 
transformation of claims over long-term or fundamentally illiquid assets into claims that are 
highly liquid is one of the critical functions that the financial sector provides for the broader 
economy.13 
Typically, long-term assets are less liquid than short-term ones, thus implying that maturity 
transformation is a sufficient condition for liquidity transformation. However, liquidity 
transformation can occur even when both assets and liabilities are short term. Consider, for 
example, an entity investing in US Treasuries and issuing liabilities that circu late as means 
of payment, or promising repayment of its liabilities in central bank money. Both assets and 
 
10 See, among many, Kroszner (2006), Quinn and Roberds (2008), and Moser (1998). Instead, banks ’ liabilities 
that are fully backed by central money are not considered in side money for the purpose of this note, even 
though the mapping between banks ’ liabilities and central bank money might become imperfect in stress 
scenarios. 
11 See Faure and Gersbach (2021); McLeay, Radia, and Thomas (2014); Jakab and Kumhof (2015); and Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2017). 
12 See Rendahl and Freund (2019). 
13 See Wallace (1996) for a formal analysis of such functions. 
5
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella

--- Page 8 ---
liabilities are short term, but the liquidity of its liabilities, which are payment instruments, is 
higher than that of its assets, which would need to be sold and converted into payment 
instruments to be used as settlement assets. 
The most common example of maturity transformation is the supply of demand deposit 
contracts by banks, while investing deposited funds in longer-term assets. Banks are not the 
only institutions that engage in maturity and/or liquidity transformation. Many collective 
investment vehicles offer a degree of liquidity to investors but invest in assets that are not 
regarded as equally liquid by financial markets, for example money market funds and  
insurance companies .14 Banks can perform maturity and liquidity transformation in two 
ways, possibly complementary with each other: 
(a) Banks diversify depositors’ payments and liquidity needs. 15 In the basic demand 
deposit contract, a depositor experiencing a liquidity need can withdraw the cash 
previously deposited at the bank and make a payment using such cash. As only some 
depositors will experience a liquidity need at any given point in time, a bank’s need 
for liquidity is smaller than its aggregate deposits, allowing the bank to invest part 
of the funds deposited by end users in long -term and more productive assets, such 
as loans to firms.  
Moreover, if the distribution of liquidity needs is known, and if the deposit base is 
sufficiently large, how many depositors will experience a liquidity need at a given 
point in time is known in advance. 16 In this setting, there is no aggregate risk, and 
depositors with no liquidity needs effectively exten d credit to depositors with 
liquidity needs. This extension of credit is risk free in aggregate for the bank, as long 
as every depositor is paid by the bank when he actually needs liquidity and no bank 
run occurs. 
(b) Banks issue liabilities that provide payme nt services. Specifically, banks issue 
deposits that can be used to settle transactions, thus creating money as described in 
the previous section.  While money creation per se is separate from maturity 
transformation, it can facilitate maturity transformation by allowing banks to settle 
payments through netting their respective obligations. Through such netting, banks 
can execute and settle transactions by relying more on their network of payment 
flows and less on central bank money, which is necessary only to settle payments 
that cannot be netted. The resulting reduction in banks’ need to hold central bank 
money increases banks’ ability to invest the funds deposited by customers, which 
are short-term liabilities, into long-term productive investments. 
 
14 For money market funds, among many, see Schmidt , Timmermann, and Wermers  (2016); Cipriani and La 
Spada (2021); Sunderam (2015); Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein  (2015); and Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein  
(2018). For insurance companies, see Foley-Fisher et al. (2020). 
15 As described in the seminal work of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and in Nobel Prize Committee (2022). 
16 In this case , the law of large numbers holds. By the law of large numbers, the average liquidity needs for a 
depositor is also the aggregate or realized liquidity need at the bank . 
6
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 9 ---
Without the provision of payment services associated with deposits (activity b), banks could 
still perform maturity transformation thanks to their diversification activity (activity a). In 
this case, however, banks need to pay cash to those depositors who demand  to withdraw 
their funds and make payments. To do so, banks need to invest at least some funds in central 
bank money, such as cash, and to disburse central bank money whenever depositors request 
a withdrawal.17 As a consequence, a bank needs to invest in a s much central bank money as 
the expected liquidity needs of its depositors. Therefore, without the provision of payment 
services associated with deposits, a bank would not be creating inside money. In this case, 
the settlement assets used by depositors to  pay would merely be different forms of central 
bank money, be it cash or CBDC if one was issued, and the economy needs as much central 
bank money as the aggregate value of transactions.  
Moreover, without the provision of payment services associated with deposits, a bank might 
still be fractionalized. A fractional reserve banking system is a system in which banks hold 
central bank reserves as a fraction of specific types of claims outstanding on its total assets, 
in particular as a fraction of its demand d eposits.18 Fractionalized banking is linked to 
maturity transformation, as a bank holding 100% of its deposits in reserves is unable to 
invest in other long -term assets .19 Some economists interchangeably discuss maturity 
transformation and fractional reserve banking. Indeed, a bank whose business model allows 
for fractional reserves will likely find investing in longer maturities profitable —conditional 
on a given risk -return trade-off. Here, however, we keep the two definitions separate and 
note that maturity transformation is a subset of fractional reserve banking (see Figure 1). 
Indeed, a bank holding a fraction of its deposits in reserves at the central bank, and investing 
the rest in US Treasuries, would operate with a fractional reserve system despite performing 
no maturity transformation.20 
 
17 Banks also hold high -quality liquid assets (HQLAs), but the conversion of HQLA s into reserves to cover net 
outflows has a similar effect to that of using already held reserves to cover the outflow s. 
18 The Federal Reserve Act authorizes the Board to impose reserve requirements on transaction accounts, 
nonpersonal time deposits, and Eurocurrency liabilities. 
19 In other words, for deposit -taking institutions, a fractionalized system is a necessary condition for them to 
perform maturity transformation. 
20 Such bank, however, could be performing liquidity transfo rmation as the liquidity of its deposits, which 
provide payment services, would exceed that of its assets, which cannot be used for settlement.  
7
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella

--- Page 10 ---
Figure 1: Money Creation, Risk Diversification, and Maturity Transformation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: The labels 2.b.i, 2.b.ii, 2.c.i, and 2.c.ii refer to CBDC settlement models described in Section IV. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
Notice that while a fractional reserve system is a necessary condition for money creation and 
maturity transformation, money creation is not a necessary condition for maturity 
transformation. Indeed, money is created when the value of transactions exceeds the stock 
of central  bank money in the economy in a unit of time, which allows banks to hold less 
reserves than the sum of claims outstanding on those reserves. However, maturity 
transformation can be performed also by nonbank financial institutions, such as insurance 
companies, which do not create money in the sense of enabling settlement as described in 
the previous section .21 An essential element of maturity transformation is the different 
maturity of an institution’s assets and liabilities. As argued earlier, banks may choose not to 
provide payment services —thus not to create inside money —but they will still be able to 
perform maturity transformation by diversifying the liquidity needs of their depositors , as 
formalized by Diamond and Dybvig (1983).  
Finally, but importantly, while banks have been known to be intrinsically fragile and prone 
to runs, it should be noted that the main cause for fragility is not money creation per se but 
maturity and/or liquidity transformation. Indeed, policymakers consider a financial stability 
concern also the maturity transformation performed by nonbanks despite nonbanks ’ 
potentially being less active in the business of money creation than banks. However, money 
 
21 See Foley-Fisher, Narajabad, and Verani (2020) and McDonald and Paulson (2015). 
 
Money Creation 
Netting Obligations 
 Circulating Liabilities 
2.c.i 
2.b.ii 
 2.c.ii 
Maturity Transformation 
Fractional Reserve Banking 
Diversifying Liquidity Risks 
2.b.i
8
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 11 ---
creation can facilitate maturity transformation. Figure 1 shows that maturity transformation 
can be performed by money creation (like banks do) or by diversifying liquidity risks (like 
banks and also other institutions do), or both, as shown by the intersection between the 
green and yellow boxes representing, respectively, money creatio n and diversification of 
liquidity risks. Figure 1 also represents the ideas described so far: money creation can be 
performed either by netting obligations (represented by the blue box) or by issuing 
circulating liabilities (represented by the gray box), and maturity transformation is a subset 
of fractional reserve banking. 
IV. CBDC and Settlement 
CBDC is a form of digital money, denominated in the national unit of account, which is a direct 
liability of the central bank, thus central bank money.22 CBDCs can be designed for use either 
among financial intermediaries only ( that is, wholesale CBDCs), or by the wider economy 
(that is, retail CBDCs). While the aim of retail CBDCs is to create a digital form of central bank 
money that can be used by everyone, wholesale CBDC experimentations have so far focused 
on improving the safety and efficiency of digital interbank transactions, such  as securities 
settlement and cross-border payments.23 For each CBDC settlement model analyzed in this 
section, we discuss its potential to be consistent with wholesale or retail CBDC. Importantly, 
however, the economic mechanisms responsible for money creation and, possibly, maturity 
transformation are the same both for wholesale and retail CBDC. 
With respect to CBDC, the key settlement models can be defined as ( a) involving only the 
activities of the central bank or as ( b) intermediated by financial insti tutions. An 
intermediated settlement model, in turn, can be characterized by three subcategories, each 
characterized by a variety of subtleties relating to the role played by financial institutions in 
the economy. Overall, we analyze five settlement models. 
Only the Central Bank Is Involved 
In a settlement model where the central bank tracks balances and transfers only at the end-
user level, all end users would be allowed to open an account at the central bank, including 
individuals. Therefore, this settlem ent model could implement a retail CBDC as well as a 
wholesale CBDC. On the one hand, if the central bank restricted activities of financial 
institutions to be retail only, then this settlement model would implement solely a retail 
CBDC.24 On the other hand, if the central bank offered CBDC balances to be held at accounts 
 
22 Central bank money refers to  money that is a liability of the central bank. In the United States, there are 
currently two types of central bank money: physical currency issued by the Federal Reserve and digital 
balances held by commercial banks at the Federal Reserve. See Fed (2022b) and Panetta (2022). 
23 For more details, see the projects undertaken by the BIS Innovation Hub  (BIS n.d.). Also, see CBDC Tracker 
(n.d.). 
24 Central banks are exploring safeguards that could be built into any CBDC to address financial stability risks, 
such as access criteria for permitted users and limits on individuals’ CBDC holdings or transactions, which could 
9
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella

--- Page 12 ---
at the central bank only to financial institutions, then this settlement model would 
implement solely a wholesale CBDC. 
With banks or other payment service providers not involved in any CB DC payment-related 
activity, there would be no inside money creation stemming from CBDC issuance. In fact, no 
netting of CBDC payment orders would take place across a network of intermediaries, nor 
would intermediaries’ liabilities backed by CBDC circulate  as a medium of exchange. 
Moreover, if intermediaries were ineligible to hold CBDC, no maturity transformation 
stemming from CBDC issuance would take place. Any maturity transformation activity in 
which intermediaries engaged would stem from their holdings of other forms of central bank 
money. Therefore, there would be no place for this settlement model in Figure 1 , while in 
Figure 2, this is defined as settlement model 1.  
However, it is worth noting that even with the central bank tracking CBDC balances at the 
user level, and with intermediaries acting as end users, it is possible that intermediaries 
might develop forms of recordkeeping and settlement of CBDC balances that operate 
separately from the central bank’s record. In doing so, banks migh t offer payment services 
on such parallel recordkeeping platforms, submitting to the central bank settlement system 
only the net transfer resulting from all the transactions recorded on their own platform s. 
Thus, the possibility to create such alternative recordkeeping platforms would transform 
this settlement model into an intermediated one, where payment services could be provided, 
possibly money could be created, and maturity transformation could be performed.  
Intermediated 
Intermediaries act as custodi ans.25 In Figure 2 , this is defined as settlement model 2.a, 
where intermediaries maintain end -user accounts or wallets and track end -user balances. 
The central bank processes CBDC balances only at the intermediary level. According to this 
settlement model, intermediaries would be effectively custodians and distributors of CBDC, 
thus implementing a retail CBDC. With intermediaries simply maintaining end-user accounts 
or wallets without proprietary CBDC holdings, there would be no money creation stemming 
from CBDC issuance, as their role in the CBDC ecosystem would purely be custodial and 
recordkeeping. As with the first settlement model, there would be no place for this 
settlement model in Figure 1, as the implications for money creation and maturity 
transformation from both models are the same. Notice that this settlement model would 
differ from the first one with banks acting as end users, as no proprietary holdings are 
considered here when banks simply act as custodians. 
 
be applied varyingly for differ ent CBDC account holders and perhaps contingent on stress events. See BIS 
(2021). 
25 The entities providing intermediation need not be financial institutions but may be any institution allowed 
by policymakers to perform the functions specified in each settl ement model. Hence, payment and wallet 
providers, even telecommunications and social media companies that have access to (retail) CBDC might be 
able to intermediate the transfer or safekeeping of CBDC. 
10
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 13 ---
Intermediaries act also as end users and offer on-balance-sheet digital liabilities. When 
intermediaries participate in the CBDC ecosystem as end users, they are allowed proprietary 
holdings of CBDC beyond holding CBDC balances for their clients. Hence, intermediaries 
might choose to use CB DC as a substitute for reserves to settle payments and to meet 
regulatory requirements, if eligible to do so. Under this settlement model, intermediaries 
might choose to offer deposit contracts in CBDC and to offer payment services associated 
with the deposit contracts, such as digital wallets or payment application program interfaces 
(APIs).26  
This settlement model would implement both a retail and a wholesale CBDC. Retail CBDC 
would be distributed to the general public  by intermediaries as in the previous settlement 
model (2.a) and could be held by intermediaries themselves for proprietary trading. 
Wholesale CBDC would be limited to the settlement of transfers across intermediaries 
originating either from proprietary tr ading or from clients’ payments associated with 
deposit contracts. 
This settlement model could greatly affect the ability of intermediaries to create inside 
money and to perform maturity transformation. 
Consider first the case where the deposit contracts o ffered by intermediaries are not 
associated with any payment service, while they might offer remuneration, safekeeping, or 
other bundles of products. In Figures 1 and 2 , this is referred to as settlement model 2.b.i. 
With the lack of payment services, no money creation stemming from CBDC issuance would 
be feasible for intermediaries. However, intermediaries might still engage in diversification 
of users’ liquidity risks, if they are able to attract sufficiently many depositors, and possibly 
in maturity transformation. Therefore, this settlement model would be located in the lower 
half of Figure 1, possibly within the black box if maturity transformation is performed. In 
particular, intermediaries could perform maturity transformation through their offering o f 
both deposit contracts in CBDC —if they are not subject to a 100% CBDC reserve 
requirement—and deposit contracts in cash or reserves, as is currently the case. With 
respect to the current environment, however, this settlement model would allow for an 
additional channel by which maturity transformation can be performed, working through 
CBDC deposits not 100% backed by CBDC. 
Consider now the case where intermediaries offer payment services associated with deposit 
contracts. In Figures 1 and 2 , this is referred to as settlement model 2.b.ii.  Besides 
diversification of liquidity risks, intermediaries could also engage in money creation. They 
could do so by simply netting payment orders among themselves before settlement takes 
place in CBDC, much like banks do now by netting each other’s obligations before settlement 
takes place in central bank reserves. By virtue of money creation, intermediaries then would 
 
26 These liabilities could be redeemable in CBDC, depen ding on the nature of the deposit contract written 
between the intermediaries and depositors. If they were redeemable in CBDC, then settlement models 2.b.i and 
2.b.ii, described later in this section , would be similar to a fixed -term deposit, which could b e anywhere from 
overnight to a longer term, and settlement model to a payment account such as a demand deposit account, 
respectively. 
11
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella

--- Page 14 ---
not need to hold a dollar of CBDC for each payment of a dollar, which w ould allow them to 
be fractionalized and engage in maturity transformation. Therefore, within this settlement 
model, intermediaries could engage in maturity transformation via two channels: 
diversification of liquidity risks, as in the previous model, and money creation. This 
settlement model would be located at the center-left of Figure 1, as both money creation and 
risk diversification could enable maturity transformation, but no liabilities are circulating as 
media of exchange. 
Intermediaries offer circu lating on -balance-sheet digital liabilities . If intermediaries 
offer on -balance-sheet liabilities to end  users, these can circulate and be readily 
transferrable much like cash. Hence, the end  user’s legal claim is not directly on the central 
bank but rathe r on the assets of the intermediaries. The intermediaries’ digital liabilities 
could then be 100% backed by central bank money .27 For example, this settlement model 
would allow for the issuance of stablecoins fully backed by central bank money. As the digital 
liability circulates, its transfers would occur on the rails on which it is designed to operate, 
possibly independent of the payment and settlement rails for the underlying CBDC. 
Redemption of the digital liability would still require wholesale or reta il CBDC settlement 
rails as, ultimately, CBDC would need to be paid to the holder of the liability to extinguish all 
obligations of the issuer.28 Similarly, issuance of the digital liability would occur on wholesale 
or retail CBDC settlement rails. Wholesa le or retail CBDC rails would be used depending on 
the type of user requesting issuance or redemption. Alternatively, the intermediaries’ digital 
liabilities could be backed by less than 100% in central bank money, as fractionalized 
banking.29 As described in Section III, a fractional reserve system allows for settlement of the 
liabilities issued by intermediaries without the need to transfer the same amount of central 
bank money for each dollar of an intermediary’s liability. As long as the intermediaries’  
liabilities circulate, no transfer of CBDC occurs because the transfer of the liabilities 
themselves can extinguish a payment obligation. For example, this settlement model would 
allow for the issuance of tokenized deposits, which could be used to make pa yments and 
could be settled on rails specifically designed for this purpose, independently of the CBDC 
settlement rails.30 Obligations stemming from the transfer of such tokenized deposits when 
 
27 Some have described versions of this model as synthetic CBDC (s -CBDC). See Auer and Böhme (2020) and 
Adrian and Mancini Griffoli (2019). 
28 It is worth highlighting that intermediaries ’ ability to offer on -balance-sheet liabilities can be implemented 
also with other forms of central bank money, such as reserves held at the central bank. Indeed, while no bank 
liabilities curr ently circulate as media of exchange, they used to do so in the Free Banking Era (see Gorton 
[1999] and Ales et al. [2008]). It is conceivable that tokens might circulate in the future, perhaps simply in the 
form of tokenized deposits. If CBDC were introduced, however, and a broader set of entities than depository 
institutions were eligible to hold it, then such entities may also issue circulating on-balance-sheet liabilities and 
settle their respective net obligations in central bank money, as banks can do today with reserve balances held 
in their accounts at the central bank. 
29 In the current payment and settlement systems, where CBDC is not present yet, this model already exists 
through deposits issued by commercial banks. 
30 This paper refers to tokenized deposits as the digital representation of existing liabilities —demand deposit 
claims—that an intermediary has on its bala nce sheet. Tokenized deposits are obligations of the intermediary 
and, besides being used for the internal representation of credits and debits of accounts at the intermediary, 
can circulate more broadly across intermediaries and users if their holders cho ose to do so. 
12
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 15 ---
returned to the issuer would be settled on either wholesale or retail CBDC rails, depending 
on the parties involved.31 
The circulating digital liabilities offered by intermediaries could then be: 
(a) 100% backed by central bank money. In Figures 1 and 2 , this is referred to as 
settlement model 2.c.i. In this case, no money creation would be feasible, despite the 
intermediaries’ liabilities could circulate as media of exchange. Moreover, the 100% 
reserve requirement for the circulating liability would prev ent the intermediary 
from performing diversification of liquidity risks and maturity transformation 
through the issuance of this specific liability. Hence, this settlement model would be 
located outside of both the green and yellow boxes in Figure 1.  Notice that this 
settlement model can be complementary to settlement model 2.b.i, as 
(noncirculating) CBDC deposits exempt from the 100% reserve requirement might 
also be issued along with fully backed circulating digital liabilities. In this case , 
maturity tra nsformation would be feasible but only through the intermediary’s 
activities not subject to the 100% backing by central bank money. 
(b) Backed by less than 100% in central bank money, as fractionalized banking.  In 
Figures 1 and 2 , this is referred to as settle ment model 2.c.ii.  This case is the 
complement of settlement model 2.b.ii, as the liabilities of an intermediary could 
also circulate as media of exchange besides being netted in settlement. Therefore, 
money creation could arise through an additional chann el with respect to 
settlement model 2.b.ii: circulation of liabilities that are not fully backed by central 
bank money. This settlement model would be located right at the center of Figure 1, 
as all activities depicted in Figure 1 would be feasible under this settlement model. 
Figure 2 summarizes the activities that are and are not feasible for each settlement model. 
In the first settlement model, where only the central bank is involved, none of the activities 
described in the previous sections can be perfo rmed, as intermediaries are not actively 
participating in the CBDC ecosystem. The same conclusion applies to the second settlement 
model, when intermediaries act as custodians (2.a). However, if intermediaries act as end 
users without offering payment services, as in settlement model 2.b.i, then diversification of 
liquidity shocks, fractional reserve banking , and maturity transformation are all feasible. 
This is a world similar to the banking model developed in Diamond and Dybvig (1983). If 
intermediaries a ct as end users and offer payment services, as in settlement model 2.b.ii, 
then money creation via netting obligations is also feasible. Finally, if intermediaries offer 
circulating on-balance-sheet digital liabilities that are 100% backed by central bank money, 
as in settlement model 2.c.i, no money creation occurs owing to the full backing of liabilities 
by central bank money. On the other hand, if the circulating on -balance-sheet digital 
liabilities are backed by less than 100% central bank money, as in settlement model 2.c.ii, 
 
31 When returned to the issuer, tokenized deposits would be settled with the same process currently used to 
settle payments from deposit accounts —which are either multilaterally netted intraday, thus requiring only 
the net obligation to be hon ored in central bank money between the banks involved, or on a real -time-gross-
settlement (RTGS) system. 
13
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella

--- Page 16 ---
then money creation becomes feasible both via circulation of such liabilities and by netting 
obligations stemming from the transfer of such liabilities. 
Figure 2: Activities That Are Feasible ( ✓) and Not Feasible ( ✕) for Each Settlement 
Model  
Source: Author’s analysis. 
V. Conclusion 
The links among money, whether issued by the central bank or produced by the financial 
system, maturity transformation, and payment systems are crucial elements for the design 
of a CBDC settlement model. Some CBDC settlement models do not allow for money creation 
nor maturity transformation and are, therefore, the least concerning from a financial 
stability perspective. Ho wever, these models require that each dollar spent be settled by 
transferring central bank money such as CBDC. Hence the velocity of a given stock of CBDC 
would need to be sufficiently high to support the same value of transactions supported by 
other settlement models that allow for money creation. 32 Settlement models that allow for 
money creation but not for maturity transformation are not necessarily threatening the 
stability of the financial system, while they retain advantages in providing some degree o f 
flexibility in the supply of liquidity to the economy given a preexisting stock of central bank 
money. In fact, setting aside trust issues such as custodial and operational risks as well as 
fraud, money creation by financial intermediaries does not pose financial stability threats. 
However, money creation is rarely present without maturity transformation owing to the 
profitability of the latter, which is made feasible by the former. Settlement models that allow 
 
32 In other words, models not allowing for money creation would be liquidity intensive, like RTGS and 
prefunded payments systems. 
CBDC 
Model 
Diversifying 
Shocks 
Fractional Reserve 
Banking 
Maturity 
Transformation 
Netting 
Obligations 
Circulating 
Liabilities 
Money Creation No Money 
Creation 
1 ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ 
2.a ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ 
2.b.i ✓ ✓ ✓ ✕ ✕ ✕ 
2.b.ii ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✕ ✕ 
2.c.i ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✕ ✓ 
2.c.ii ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✕ 
14
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 17 ---
for maturity transformation are the riskiest  from a financial stability perspective as they 
expose the financial system to potentially destabilizing runs. 
15
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella

--- Page 18 ---
VI. References 
Adrian, Tobias, and Tommaso Mancini Griffoli. 2019. “The Rise of Digital Money.” FinTech 
Notes 2019, no. 001 (July).  
https://doi.org/10.5089/9781498324908.063 
Ales, Laurence, Francesca Carapella, Pricila Maziero, and Warren E. Weber. 2008. “A Model 
of Banknote Discounts.” Journal of Economic Theory 142, no. 1 (September): 5–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jet.2006.10.010  
Auer, Raphael, and Rainer Böhme. 2020. “The Technology of Retail Central Bank Digital 
Currency.” BIS Quarterly Review 2020, no. 1 (March): 85–100.  
https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt2003j.htm 
Bank for International Settlements (BIS). n.d. “BIS Innovation Hub Projects.” BIS. Accessed 
May 28, 2025. 
https://www.bis.org/about/bisih/projects.htm?m=268  
———. 2021. “Central Bank Digital Currencies: Financial Stability Implications.” Bank for 
International Settlements Report No. 2021/4, September 2021.  
https://www.bis.org/publ/othp42_fin_stab.pdf 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed). 2022a. “Money and Payments: 
The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation.” Research & Analysis White Paper, 
January 14, 2022.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/money-and-payments-discussion-
paper.htm  
———. 2022b. “What Is Central Bank Digital Currency?” FAQs, January 20, 2022.  
https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/what-is-a-central-bank-digital-currency.htm 
Cavalcanti, Ricardo de O., and Neil Wallace. 1999. “Inside and Outside Money as Alternative 
Media of Exchange.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 31, no. 3 (August): 432–57. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2601062  
CBDC Tracker. n.d. “Todays’ Central Bank Digital Currencies Status.” Human Rights 
Foundation. Accessed May 28, 2025. 
 https://cbdctracker.org/  
Cipriani, Marco, and Gabriele La Spada. 2021. “Investors’ Appetite for Money-like Assets: 
The MMF Industry after the 2014 Regulatory Reform.” Journal of Financial Economics 140, 
no. 1 (April): 250–69. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2020.11.005  
Committee for the Prize in Economic Sciences in the Memory of Alfred Nobel (Nobel Prize 
Committee). 2022. “Financial Intermediation and the Economy.” Royal Swedish Academy of 
16
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 19 ---
Sciences, October 10, 2022.  
https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2022/10/advanced-economicsciencesprize2022.pdf 
Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure. 2016. “A Glossary of Terms Used in 
Payments and Settlement Systems.” Bank for International Settlements, October 17, 2016.  
https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d00b.htm  
Deutsche Bundesbank. 2017. “The Role of Banks, Non-Banks and the Central Bank in the 
Money Creation Process.” Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report 69, no. 4(April): 13–33. 
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:212736206  
Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and 
Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 3 (June): 401–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/261155  
Faure, Salomon, and Hans Gersbach. 2021. “On the Money Creation Approach to Banking.” 
Annals of Finance 17, no. 3 (September): 265–318. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10436-021-00385-5  
Foley-Fisher, Nathan, Borghan Narajabad, and Stéphane Verani. 2020. “Self-fulfilling Runs: 
Evidence from the US Life Insurance Industry.” Journal of Political Economy 128, no. 9 
(September): 3520–69. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/708817  
Gorton, Gary. 1999. “Pricing Free Bank Notes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 44, no. 1 
(August): 33–64.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3932(99)00014-8 
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2015. “A Comparative‐
Advantage Approach to Government Debt Maturity.” Journal of Finance 70, no. 4 (August): 
1683–722. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12253  
———. 2018. “The Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet as a Financial-Stability Tool.” In 
Innovative Federal Reserve Policies during the Great Financial Crisis, edited by Douglas D. 
Evanoff, George G. Kaufman, and A.G. Malliaris, 63–124. Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific 
Publishing Company.  
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789813236592_0003  
Jakab, Zoltan, and Michael Kumhof. 2015. “Banks are Not Intermediaries of Loanable 
Funds–and Why This Matters.” Bank of England Working Paper No. 529, May 2015. 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2015/banks-are-not-intermediaries-
of-loanable-funds-and-why-this-matters  
Kroszner, Randall S. 2006. “Central Counterparty Clearing: History, Innovation, and 
Regulation.” Speech delivered at the Issues Related to Central Counterparty Clearing joint 
conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the European Central Bank, 
17
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella

--- Page 20 ---
Frankfurt, Germany, April 3, 2006.  
https://ssrn.com/abstract=948773  
Marimon, Ramon, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2003. “Inside–Outside Money 
Competition.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, no. 8 (November): 1701–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2003.08.009  
McDonald, Robert, and Anna Paulson. 2015. “AIG in Hindsight.” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 29, no. 2 (Spring): 81–106. 
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.29.2.81  
McLeay, Michael, Amar Radia, and Ryland Thomas. 2014. “Money Creation in the Modern 
Economy.” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 54, no. 1 (March): 14–27. 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/quarterly-bulletin/2014/money-
creation-in-the-modern-economy.pdf  
Mills, David C. 2007. “A Model in Which Outside and Inside Money are Essential.” 
Macroeconomic Dynamics 11, no. 3 (June): 347–66. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1365100506060123  
Moser, James T. 1998. “Contracting Innovations and the Evolution of Clearing and 
Settlement Methods at Futures Exchanges.” FRB of Chicago Working Paper No. 26, August 
1998.  
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.910505  
Panetta, Fabio. 2022. “Demystifying Wholesale Central Bank Digital Currency.” Speech 
delivered at the symposium on Payments and Securities Settlement in Europe – Today and 
Tomorrow hosted by the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt, Germany, September 26, 2022. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2022/html/ecb.sp220926~5f9b85685a.en.h
tml  
Quinn, Stephen F., and William Roberds. 2008. “The Evolution of the Check as a Means of 
Payment: A Historical Survey.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review 93, no. 4 
(December). 
https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/economic-review-federal-reserve-bank-atlanta-
884/fourth-quarter-2008-601637  
Rendahl, Pontus, and Lukas B. Freund. 2019. “Banks Do Not Create Money Out of Thin Air.” 
VoxEU, December 14, 2019.  
https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/banks-do-not-create-money-out-thin-air 
Schmidt, Lawrence, Allan Timmermann, and Russ Wermers. 2016. “Runs on Money Market 
Mutual Funds.” American Economic Review 106, no. 9 (September): 2625–57. 
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20140678  
18
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 3

--- Page 21 ---
Sunderam, Adi. 2015. “Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System.” Review of 
Financial Studies 28, no. 4 (April): 939–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhu083  
Wallace, Neil. 1996. “Narrow Banking Meets the Diamond-Dybvig Model.” Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 20, no. 1 (Winter): 3–13. 
https://doi.org/10.21034/qr.2011  
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
19
CBDC Settlement: Implications for Money Creation and Maturity Transformation Carapella