--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 2 
2025 
Lessons Learned: Miguel Carcaño Lessons Learned: Miguel Carcaño 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2025) "Lessons Learned: Miguel Carcaño," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 2, 
363-365. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1661 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss2/15 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol7/iss2/15

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Miguel Carcaño 
By Mercedes Cardona 
During the Global Financial Crisis  (GFC), Miguel Carcaño served as head of the Spanish 
Treasury’s Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring, the authority in charge of managing the 
restructuring process of the country’s credit institutions. The fund, known today as the Spanish 
Executive Resolution Authority, is integrated into the European network led by the Single 
Resolution Board (SRB) of the European Union’s banking union. Carcaño has held a number of 
posts within the SRB and in 2022 became head of the Single Resolution Fund, the SRB’s 
emergency fun d, which serves as backstop for institutions across the banking union’s 21 
countries. This “Lesson Learned” is based on an interview with Carcaño in March 2024; the full 
transcript may be found here. 
Liquidity is critical to address a crisis, but liquidity by itself is not a solution, unless it 
also addresses the underlying cause.  
Spain’s banking system was believed to be safe from the pressures of the GFC because its 
largest institutions —such as Banco Santander and Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria  
(BBVA)—appeared well capitalized. But the country’s system of cajas (public savings banks) 
was loaded with consumer loans, many of which fueled  a housing bubble that collapsed, 
leading to substantial debt and deficits. Believing the crisis to be a liquidity event, the Banco 
de España, Spain’s cent ral bank, delayed acting. However, as the European Sovereign Debt 
Crisis hit the eurozone, the EU offered Spain a EUR 100 billion bailout that required 
substantial restructuring of its banking sector, which was politically unpopular with the 
Spanish population. Spanish taxpayers would eventually foot more than EUR 60 billion of 
the bailout costs, with the European Union (EU) contributing EUR 42 billion.  
In commenting on the bailout, Carcaño explained that a crisis response must balance short-
term measures to arrest the crisis and halt damage to the banking sector with medium-term 
objectives of ensuring financial stability and correcting structural weaknesses. It all requires 
broad political and social support, something that was hard to come by in Spain in 2012, 
because the measures were very harsh on the real economy.  
According to Carcaño, Spain was dealt a “Molotov cocktail” of conditions at the start of the 
GFC. It faced a “macroeconomic scenario that was extremely weak ” at home and across 
Europe, low fiscal capacity because of ballooning unemployment, and intractable problems 
in the financial sector from the collapse of the cajas.  
The Spanish government initially tackled the crisis by facilitating the merg er of ailing cajas 
and injected liquidity into the system. But merging institutions that were failing owing to 
mismanagement and lax oversight only created larger failing institutions. One of the reasons 
for a liquidity approach , Carcaño said, was that , at the start of the crisis,  the Spanish 
government, the bank supervisor, and the Banco de España lacked the legal framework for 
resolution to wind down the banks . They managed the crisis as best  they could with the 
363

--- Page 4 ---
existing tools at their disposal, said Carcaño, “so we did bail in, we did sale of business, we 
organized the asset management company, et cetera.”  
It was only in 2009 that the government established the Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring 
(Fondo de Reestructuración Ordenada Bancaria , or FROB ) to wind down the failing cajas.  
The Society to Manage Bank Restructuring Assets  (Sociedad de Gestión de Activos 
Procedentes de la Reestructuración Bancaria , or SAREB), the asset management company 
established to handle the distressed assets of the banks, would not be established until 2012, 
under the terms of the memorandum of understanding with the EU.  
Once the EU funds were available , “everything changed, ” said Carca ño. T he Spa nish 
government was able to act and staunch the crisis by absorbing the problem assets from the 
banks. SAREB was a good tool, Carcaño explained, but it was not cost free.  
You have to transfer the assets from the bank ’s balance sheet to the so -called bad 
bank, but there is a need to have a transfer price, and normally this transfer price is 
extremely low. Someone needs to be there to absorb losses. This is the real problem 
of the asset management company, that you need to be extremely prudent, because 
otherwise it won’t be a successful tool. You need to transfer the assets at a fair price, 
and then the losses appear in the balance sheet of the bank. 
I think that at the end of the day, the Spanish authorities did a lot. And it was clearly 
for me a case that h elped me understand what should be done in a crisis. Part of the 
measures that we took in Spain are now in the resolution regulation that we have now 
in Europe, which means that something good was done. 
The financial system needs a proper backstop to instill confidence and avoid 
contagion. Without it, the EU’s crisis management scheme is still a work in progress.  
When the GFC overwhelmed the cajas, the  Spanish government was unwilling to let them 
fail.   
In the wake of the Sovereign Debt Crisis, the European Central Bank now leads a Single 
Supervisory Mechanism, and the SRB leads a mechanism for orderly bank resolution across 
the EU, he continued. Additionally, the EU set targets requiring banks to hold a minimum of 
bail-in-eligible liabilities in case of resolution , which, in his opinion , has helped make 
insolvency problems less likely.   
But political tensions among the 2 7 member states and moral hazard arguments have 
delayed creation of a deposit guarantee scheme for the EU’s banking union. As part of the 
discussions to revise the existing banking union’s Crisis Management and Deposit Insurance 
Framework directives, the SRB had proposed creating a European Deposit Insurance 
Scheme, but th at proposal also stalled. The European Parliament recently endorsed the 
measure, but “this is clearly the missing piece of the banking union,” said Carcaño. 
The EU’s Single Resolution Fund does offer a safety net, funded by EUR 78 billion collected 
so far, with an additional EUR 68 billion facility available through the European Stability 
364
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 2

--- Page 5 ---
Mechanism—an EU-level fiscal backstop fund . These funds can be used to stabilize failing 
banks, but Carcaño warned it would not be enough to bail out some of the largest European 
banks.  
In a crisis, communicating effectively to various stakeholders is important. 
Carcaño summed up his comments by emphasizing the role of communications in crisis 
fighting. Officials need to be able to go to the public with an authoritative message that they 
have things in hand and reassure depositors so they don’t create a bank run, he emphasized. 
It is extremely important to have an effective and a very clear communication on what 
you have been doing. On Monday morning, you need to be able to give to the market 
a clear diagnosis. What has happened with this bank? And you need to be able to 
communicate what solutions or measures you put in place in order to solve the 
problems. And this has to be communicated to the analysts, to the press, to everyone 
in order to restore the credibility right from the start. Otherwise, you can put your 
resolution scheme at risk if you don’t communicate properly what you are doing. 
Dated: June 2025 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2024–01 
 
365
Lessons Learned: Miguel Carcaño Cardona