--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 7 Issue 1 
2025 
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma: What Can We Learn from Eliminating Discount Window Stigma: What Can We Learn from 
Abroad? Abroad? 
Susan McLaughlin 
YPFS, Yale School of Management 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
 Part of the Banking and Finance Law Commons, Economic History Commons, Finance Commons, 
Finance and Financial Management Commons, Law and Economics Commons, Policy Design, Analysis, 
and Evaluation Commons, and the Public Administration Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
McLaughlin, Susan (2025) "Eliminating Discount Window Stigma: What Can We Learn from Abroad?," 
Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 7 : Iss. 1, 690-706. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1637 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/iss1/27 
This Note is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and EliScholar – A Digital 
Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This note is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol7/
iss1/27

--- Page 3 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma:  
What Can We Learn from Abroad?1  
Susan McLaughlin2  
April 15, 2025 
Abstract 
This article picks up from an earlier Journal of Financial Crisis  policy note on discount 
window design to see how the experiences of other central banks can inform work to 
redesign the discount window to reduce stigma. As explained in that article, banks’ 
reluctance to use the discount window is problematic for financial stability as it constrains 
the Fed’s ability to use  its liquidity provision tools to stem runs and mitigate contagion in 
times of stress. The stigma associated with discount window borrowing in the United States 
is well documented and is a multifaceted phenomenon. 
Keywords: banking, central banking, crisis  management, financial institutions, financial 
stability, liquidity, LOLR  
 
1 A version of this note was originally published on the Yale Program on Financial Stability’s Systemic Risk Blog 
on July 10, 2024.  
2 Susan McLaughlin is an executive fellow and lecturer at the Yale Program on Financial Stability, Yale School  
of Management. In her 30 -year career at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, she held senior management  
responsibility for discount window and collateral valuation operations during the Global Financial Crisis and  
for several emergency lending programs put in place to support the US economy during the onset of the COVID-
19 pandemic in 2020.  
690

--- Page 4 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Introduction 
This article picks up from “Policy Note: Discount Window Stigma: What’s Design Got to Do 
with It?” (McLaughlin 2024a), an earlier piece on discount window design to see how the 
experiences of other central banks can inform work to redesign the discount window to 
reduce stigma. As explained in that article, banks’ reluctance to use the discount window is 
problematic for financial stability as it constrains the Fed’s ab ility to use its liquidity 
provision tools to stem runs and mitigate contagion in times of stress. The stigma associated 
with discount window borrowing in the U nited States is well documented and is a 
multifaceted phenomenon, as described in another previous article (McLaughlin 2023). 
However, some other central banks do not experience the same degree of stigmatization of 
their lending tools. This Policy Note  examines the liquidity provision tools of four other 
central banks—the Bank of Canada (BoC), the Bank of England (BoE), the European Central 
Bank (ECB), and the Swiss National Bank (SNB)—to explore lessons from their liquidity tools 
that could be applied to make the Fed’s lender-of-last-resort tools more effective and less 
stigmatized. These central ban ks were chosen both for the transparency of their operating 
frameworks and because little or no stigma is associated with their on -demand liquidity 
provision tools. 
How do we know that these central banks’ standing liquidity facilities are not stigmatized?  
In the reserves scarcity frameworks that many central banks used to implement monetary 
policy before the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), standing facilities were designed to get 
reserves to banks that weren’t able to obtain them in the market on a given da y. They were 
priced to put a ceiling on money market rates, as a means to limit rate volatility and support 
interest rate control. Stigma was evident when banks preferred to pay a higher rate to 
borrow in the market to avoid using the central bank’s standing facility.3 But at present, just 
like the Fed, the BoC, BoE, ECB , and SNB are all operating with abundant levels of reserves, 
with relatively little demand for central bank liquidity except in periods of financial market 
stress, making usage -based assessments of stigma difficult. To determine whether these 
central banks’ facilities experience the type of stigma associated with the discount window, 
I reviewed the few academic pieces that have been published on the topic and spoke with 
staff at each central bank about their assessment of stigma based on their ongoing marke t 
monitoring.4 In all four cases, staff confirmed that they saw no evidence of stigma that would 
deter banks from using the central bank’s standing facilities when needed, based both on 
their ongoing conversations with banks and banks' willingness to use standing facilities in 
recent episodes of funding market stress. 
 
3 For example s of empirical evidence of discount window stigma in the US, which demonstrate banks’ 
willingness to pay up in the market rather than obtain a cheaper rate at the window , see Furfine (2004). 
4 For an assessment of stigma in ECB standing facilities, see Lee and Sarkar (2018). Also see Lee and Sarkar 
(2016) for an assessment of the impact of post-GFC reforms of the BoE’s standing facilities on stigma. 
691
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
How Are Other Central Banks’ Liquidity Provision Tools 
Designed? 
Figures 1 through 5 summarize publicly available information on the current BoC, BoE, ECB, 
and SNB operating frameworks for liquidity provision to the banking sector. The focus here 
is provision of local currency liquidity, on an overnight basis, and excludes cross -currency 
tools such as central bank swaps. Figure 1 shows the tools each central bank has to provide 
liquidity to banks, categorized as monetary policy tools, liquidity backstop tools, recovery 
funding and, where the central bank plays a role in it, resolution funding. Figure 2 
summarizes how these tools are priced. Figure 3 highlights several features of these 
frameworks for liquidity provision that contrast with the Fed’s framework. Figure 4 
illustrates how these central banks communicate about their liquidity provision tools. Figure 
5 summarizes how supervisors in each  jurisdiction treat capacity to borrow at the central 
bank in their oversight of banks’ liquidity risk management.
692
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma McLaughlin

--- Page 6 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 1: Central Bank Frameworks for Overnight or Term Liquidity Provision to Banks 
a Acronyms used in this figure are BoC: Bank of Canada; CDIC: Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation; CTRF: Contingent Term Repo Facility; DWF: Discount Window Facility; ECB: 
European Central Bank; ELA: emergency liquidity assistance; FI: financial institution; ILTR: Index Long -Term Repo; LSFF: Liquidity-Shortage Financing Facility; LTRO: Long Term 
Refinancing Operations; MLF: Marginal Lending Facility; MRO: Main  Refinancing Operations; O/N  repo: overnight repo; OSF: Operational Standing Facility; Repo: repurchase 
agreement; SLF: Standing Liquidity Facility; SRF: Standing Repo Facility; ST repo: short-term repo; STLF: Standing Term Liquidity Facility. 
b Per Article 55 of EU Guideline 2015/510 of the European Central Bank. 
c CAMELS are composite supervisory ratings of bank condition; 1 is the highest rating, 5 the lowest. 
d Subject to limits on lending to undercapitalized institutions under the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991. 
Sources: ECB 2015; Stackhouse 2018; and the websites of the Bank of Canada, Bank of England, European Central Bank, Federal Reserve, and Swiss National Bank.
 
Bank of Canada  Bank of England  European Central Bank  Swiss National Bank Federal Reserve 
Banks can obtain liquidity as 
counterparties in monetary 
policy operations (when 
central bank is injecting 
liquidity) 
Yes, if solvent 
• SLFa 
• O/N repo 
Yes, if solvent 
• OSF 
• ST repo 
Yes, if financially soundb 
• MRO 
• LTRO 
Yes, if solvent 
• Repos 
No; most banks are ineligible to 
become primary dealers. Only primary 
dealers can participate in repos 
conducted to implement monetary 
policy. SRF access only 
Banks have access to a 
standing liquidity facility to 
meet routine temporary 
funding needs and to 
mitigate payment system 
and financial stability risks 
Yes, if no evidence of soundness 
concerns 
• STLF 
Yes, if solvent 
• DWF 
• ILTR 
In case of market-wide 
event 
• CTRF 
Yes, if financially soundb 
• MLF 
Yes, if solvent 
• LSFF 
Yes, if CAMELS 1,2,3c 
• Primary credit 
 
Yes, if CAMELS 4,5c 
• Secondary credit 
Banks can borrow to support 
their recovery 
Yes, if banks meet ELA eligibility 
criteria 
• ELA 
Yes, if solvent  
and there is a financial 
stability rationale and UK 
Treasury approval 
• ELA 
Yes, if solvent 
• ELA (provided by the 
national central bank) 
Yes, if solvent and 
systemically important 
• ELA 
Yes, if CAMELS 4,5c,d 
• Secondary credit 
Provider of liquidity to 
facilitate resolution of failing 
bank (to the extent 
liquidation of assets does not 
yield sufficient liquidity to 
meet all obligations to 
depositors) 
Canada Deposit Insurance 
Corporation 
 
The BoC may provide ELA to 
support the FI’s resolution if there 
is sufficient collateral and a very 
credible path to repayment, in 
coordination with the CDIC 
Deposit Guarantee Scheme 
 
In some cases, ELA could 
be provided to support the 
resolution of a systemically 
important bank 
Single Resolution Fund for banks 
under ECB supervision 
 
National resolution authority for 
smaller banks (in some 
jurisdictions, may include ELA 
from national central bank to 
support resolution process) 
Esisuisse (private agency 
that manages the Swiss 
depositor protection 
scheme) 
Note: Swiss Federal 
Council is now 
considering legislation to 
establish a public 
liquidity backstop for a 
systemic bank in 
resolution 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
 
In some cases, discount window 
lending may be used to temporarily 
fund a bridge bank as part of the 
resolution process 
693
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 7 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 2: Pricing of “On-Demand” Standing Liquidity Facilities for Sound Banks 
a Acronyms used in this figure are bps: basis points; BR: bank rate; DFR: deposit facility rate; DWF: Discount 
Window Facility; FF: federal funds rate; ILTR: Index Long -Term Repo; LSFF: Liquidity -Shortage Financing 
Facility; MLF: Marginal Lending Facility; OIR: overnight interbank rate; OIS: overnight indexed swap; SNBPR: 
Swiss National Bank policy rate; STLF:  Standing Term Liquidity Facility. 
b STLF rate can never be less than the bank rate, equal to OIR + 25, according to Bank of England website. 
c The European Central Bank announced that the MLF rate will be reduced to DFR + 40 effective September 18, 
2024. 
d The LSFF rate can never be less than 0%, according to the Swiss National Bank website. 
Sources: (BoE 2019; ECB 2015; Stackhouse 2018). 
  
  Bank of Canada Bank of England European Central 
Bank 
Swiss National Bank Federal Reserve 
Policy rate Overnight interbank 
rate  
Bank rate Deposit facility rate  Swiss National Bank 
policy rate  
Fed funds rate 
Pricing of standing 
facilities for sound 
banks 
STLF (up to 30 days) 
1-mo OIS + 35 bpsb for 
marketable collateral 
1-mo OIS + 75 bpsb for 
nonmarketable 
collateral 
  
DWF (up to 30 days) 
Fee based on 
collateral type and 
quantity borrowed 
ILTR (6 months) 
Minimum bid: 
   Level A = BR 
   Level B = BR + 5 bps 
   Level C = BR + 15 bps 
MLF (overnight) 
DFR + 75 bpsc 
LSFF (overnight) 
SNBPR + 50 bpsd 
Primary credit (up to 
90 days) 
Top of FF range 
694
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma McLaughlin

--- Page 8 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 3: Differences between Fed and other Central Bank Operating Frameworks 
a In the US context, for purposes of central bank liquidity provision, “sound” banks are defined as those with a 
composite CAMELS rating of 3 or better. “Weaker” banks have a composite CAMELS rating of 4 or lower. 
Source: Author’s analysis. 
  Bank of Canada, Bank of England, European 
Central Bank, Swiss National Bank 
Federal Reserve 
Monetary policy 
implementation tools 
and counterparties 
In recent years, collateralized lending has 
played a relatively large role in the 
implementation of monetary policy 
operations designed to add liquidity to the 
system 
As counterparties to monetary policy 
operations, banks have had routine, on-
demand access to central bank liquidity even 
aside from standing facilities 
In recent years, collateralized lending has 
played a relatively smaller role (relative to 
outright purchases of securities) in the 
implementation of monetary policy 
operations designed to add liquidity to the 
system 
Most banks are not eligible to become 
primary dealers and cannot participate in 
liquidity-injecting repo operations—though 
they are eligible to borrow at the Fed’s 
Standing Repo Facility as well as the discount 
window 
Eligibility criteria for 
access to standing 
liquidity facilities 
Standing facilities that provide routine, on-
demand liquidity to meet temporary needs 
are only available to “solvent” banks. 
Liquidity needs of troubled banks are 
typically met with different tools, often 
subject to different governance 
Both sound and troubled banks have access 
to the discount window, albeit on different 
terms 
Banks that are judged by their supervisor to 
be “generally sound”a can use primary credit; 
banks that are not may use secondary credit 
Determination of 
eligibility 
The solvency judgment is informed primarily 
by supervisory assessments of capital 
adequacy. Solvency is not precisely defined in 
the central bank’s public communication 
Eligibility for primary or secondary credit is 
determined by the composite CAMELS rating 
from the bank’s primary regulator, which 
reflects not only capital adequacy but other 
considerations including asset quality, 
management capability, earnings, liquidity, 
and sensitivity to market risk 
Public/quasi-public 
sector alternatives to 
central bank liquidity 
The central bank is the sole public sector 
entity that can provide a liquidity backstop to 
banks outside of a resolution process 
Banks can borrow from their Federal Home 
Loan Bank when they have funding needs 
they cannot fulfill in the market, on terms 
that are often favorable relative to the 
discount window 
Transparency of 
central bank lending 
transactions to public 
The central bank is not required by law to 
publish the details of loans it makes to banks 
The central bank is required by law to 
disclose all details of all discount window 
borrowing transactions to the public, at a 
two-year lag 
695
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 9 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 4: Central Banks’ Communication about Standing Liquidity Facilities  
Note: Direct quotes, emphasis added. 
a STLF: Standing Term Liquidity Facility. 
Sources: BoC 2021; BoE 2025; ECB 2024; ECB n.d.; Federal Reserve 2023; Federal Reserve 2024a; SNB 2023. 
 
 
  
Bank of Canada Framework for 
Market Operations 
The STLFa is intended to provide improved confidence that an eligible 
financial institution facing liquidity stress will have access to central bank 
liquidity on terms that are known in advance. A financial institution can face 
liquidity stress from various sources, including system-wide liquidity conditions 
as well as operational incidents such as cyber attacks, system failures and 
natural disasters. The institution is eligible to draw on the facility if the Bank 
has no concerns about its financial soundness. 
Bank of England Market 
Operations Guide 
All of our liquidity facilities are intended to support our “open for 
business” approach. This means there is no presumptive order of usage. An 
eligible firm can choose to meet a liquidity need by using our liquidity 
facilities, alongside market sources of liquidity and their own liquidity buffers 
according to their own preference. 
The decision when and how to use facilities is up to each firm. We would not 
expect firms to rely solely on our facilities for routine day-to-day liquidity 
management (and we have priced those facilities accordingly). But neither are 
our facilities intended to be only a last resort. 
European Central Bank 
webpage on the Eurosystem’s 
instruments 
The Eurosystem intends to provide central bank reserves through a broad mix 
of instruments in order to offer an effective, flexible and stable source of 
liquidity to the banking system, thereby also supporting financial stability. 
March 2024 announcement of 
changes to European Central 
Bank’s monetary policy 
implementation framework 
The operational framework needs to be robust to different monetary policy 
configurations as well as different financial and liquidity environments, and 
consistent with the use of the monetary policy instruments set out in the 
ECB’s monetary policy strategy. 
Guidelines on Swiss National 
Bank monetary policy 
instruments 
For monetary policy instruments, a distinction is made between open market 
operations and standing facilities. In the case of open market operations, the 
SNB takes the initiative in the transaction, while for the standing facilities it 
merely specifies the conditions at which counterparties can obtain 
liquidity. Open market operations comprise repo transactions, issues of SNB 
Bills, and their purchase and sale in the secondary market. Standing facilities 
include the liquidity-shortage financing facility and the intraday facility. 
Federal Reserve System 
Discount Window website 
Primary credit is available to generally sound depository institutions. 
 . . . Secondary credit is available to meet backup liquidity needs when its use 
is consistent with a timely return to a reliance on market sources of funding 
or the orderly resolution of a troubled institution. 
Federal Reserve Operating 
Circular No. 10, Section 14.1 
The Bank is not obligated by the Lending Agreement or otherwise to make, 
increase, renew, or extend any Advance to the Borrower. 
696
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma McLaughlin

--- Page 10 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Figure 5: Supervisory Treatment of Borrowing Capacity across Jurisdictions 
a See the Bank of England’s statement of policy on funding in resolution at BoE (2019). 
b Guidance published by the banking regulatory agencies in the US in February 2019 notes that a bank holding 
company “may assume that its depository institutions will have access to the discount window only for a few 
days after the point of failure to facilitate orderly resolution” (Federal Reserve 2020). 
c Acronyms used in this figure are HQLA: high-quality liquid assets; LCR: liquid capital ratio; LSFF: Liquidity-
Shortage Financing Facility; STLF: Standing Term Liquidity Facility. 
Sources: BoE 2019; de Groen 2018; Federal Reserve 2020; author’s analysis. 
Observations from Cross-Jurisdictional Comparisons 
Operating framework design affects the level of stigma associated with the central 
bank’s liquidity provision tools. As shown in Figure 1, the BoC, BoE, ECB, and SNB all draw 
a much brighter line between on-demand lending to healthy banks and discretionary lending 
to troubled ones. Clear separation helps to avoid stigmatizing use of the on-demand facility. 
By contrast, as argued in a previous article, the Fed’s administration of programs for lending 
to both healthy and troubled banks under a single discount  window appears to have 
stigmatized primary credit by association with secondary credit (McLaughlin 2024a). 
  Canada UK Euro area Switzerland US 
Central bank borrowing 
capacity may be counted 
as a source of funding in 
resolution plans 
Yes, while the 
bank is solvent 
No, but firm is 
expected to 
plan for 
funding in 
resolutiona 
Yes, for routine 
standing 
facilities 
No Yes, for a 
limited time 
periodb 
Central bank borrowing 
capacity may be counted 
as a source of funding in 
internal stress tests 
Yes, STLFc was 
included in 
2023 solvency 
stress test 
No Yes; banks 
must have a 
policy 
regarding 
normal versus 
stress usage 
No No 
Banks must periodically 
test readiness to use 
central bank facilities 
No Yes; regular 
testing 
required, more 
often for larger 
banks 
No Yes, the Swiss 
National Bank 
conducts tests 
LSFF with 
banks regularly 
No 
Unencumbered collateral 
pledged to the central 
bank can be counted in 
the LCR calculation 
HQLA only HQLA only HQLA only HQLA only HQLA only 
697
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 11 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Differences in how monetary policy is implemented also matter for stigma.  The US 
monetary policy framework does not rely on liquidity provision to banks in periods of policy 
accommodation—unlike other jurisdictions —for two reasons. First, in recent years, 
collateralized lending has played a smaller role in US liquidity-providing operations (relative 
to asset purchases) than in other jurisdictions. The BoC, BoE, ECB, and SNB relied heavily on 
term repos with banks to inject liquidity during the pandemic, compared with the Fed, which 
relied more heavily on large scale asset purchases from primary dealers. Second, while banks 
are counterparties for monetary policy operations of all four peer central banks analyzed 
above, very few banks meet the eligibility requirements to participate in the Fed’s monetary 
policy operations (FRBNY n.d.). As a result, bank borrowing from the se four central banks 
has been more commonplace, and thereby less stigmatized, than in the US. Banks in the US 
appear to be less incentivized to pre -position collateral at the central bank than those 
operating in jurisdictions where pre -positioned collateral can also be utilized in monetary 
policy operations. 
The central bank’s communications about its liquidity tools and framework 
materially affect the level of stigma. In Canada, the eurozone, Switzerland, and the UK, the 
central bank’s public stance is that short -term b orrowing from the standing facility is a 
perfectly acceptable source of liquidity for solvent banks and is available on -demand. This 
stance is mirrored in supervisory messaging to banks. Notably, neither of these things have 
consistently been true in the U S since the current incarnation of the discount window was 
launched in 2003. That redesign was initially accompanied by clear and repeated 
communication to banks and the general public that primary credit borrowing was 
desirable—both as a mechanism to support interest rate control for monetary policy and as 
a tool to ensure distribution of reserves to where they were needed —and that it would be 
granted on a “no questions asked” basis (Federal Reserve 2002; Madigan and Nelson 2002). 
However, this messaging faded amid criticism of the Fed’s lending to banks (and nonbanks) 
during and after the GFC. While Fed policymakers have recently been making a concerted 
effort to urge that all banks be ready to use primary credit and that they should use it when 
needed,5 (Board of Governors 2002; Madigan and Nelson 2002)  many banks continue to 
report that their supervisors and/or senior management continue to discourage use  
(McLaughlin 2024b). Indeed, the May 2023 version of the O ffice of the Comptroller of the 
Currency’s supervisory handbook on liquidity still contains language casting doubt on its 
availability when needed: “ The discount window is available to relieve liquidity strains for 
individual banks as well as the banking system, but the Federal Reserve Banks are n ot 
required to lend through the discount window” (OCC 2012). 
As discussed in a previous article, this language reflects the so -called “constructive 
ambiguity” about discount window lending that was built into Section 10B of the Federal 
Reserve Act with the passage of the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 (Federal Reserve 2017; 
McLaughlin 2024a) . This language appears to reflect concerns about lending to failing 
institutions but does not distinguish between sound and weak banks and thus applies 
uncertainty to all discount window lending. Such uncertainty is not present in other central 
 
5 See, for example, Vice Chair Barr’s May 20, 2024, speech and President Logan’s May 10, 2024, reported 
remarks (Barr 2024; Derby 2024). 
698
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma McLaughlin

--- Page 12 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
banks’ communication about their on -demand standing facilities and is not consistent with 
the idea of routine access to liquidity; thus, it contributes to stigmatization of primary credit 
in the US. 
The way a central bank c ommunicates about eligibility for its routine, on -demand 
facility can affect the level of stigma associated with it . The Fed ’s discount window 
website describes primary credit as a tool for “generally sound” banks and secondary credit 
as a tool for “banks not eligible for primary credit ,” implying that “unsound” banks can 
borrow from the discount window. Primary and secondary credit eligibility are dete rmined 
by the composite CAMELS rating of the bank, leaving little room for judgment about lending 
to a bank whose condition has deteriorated materially since its last supervisory examination 
and rating update  (Federal Reserve 2024b). This can be viewed as a more comprehensive, 
and in theory more effective, approach to assessing a bank’s safety and soundness than 
simply focusing on capital adequacy. But reliance on a numerical rating is only as sound as 
the timeliness of that rating. CAMELS ratings are not updated frequently; Silicon Valley Bank 
and Signature Bank are only the latest examples of banks that had a composite rating of 3 or 
better until shortly before failure. Indeed, the failure of banks that were eligible for primary 
credit until just before their demise may itself have contributed to the stigma associated with 
primary credit. 
By contrast, the BoC, BoE, ECB, and SNB all simply state that the on-demand standing facility 
is available only to solvent banks, while not defining solvency precisely. Th is approach 
retains room for judgment in lending decisions that can help to promote financial stability, 
while also signaling to the public that use of the on -demand standing facility is not to be 
interpreted as a sign of distress at the borrowing bank, thereby mitigating stigma. 
Including central bank borrowing capacity in supervisory measures of contingent 
liquidity resources helps to reduce stigma. While the Fed worked closely with 
supervisors in the years immediately following the 2003 redesign of the discount window to 
align on the “no questions asked” messaging on primary credit usage, the new liquidity and 
resolution planning requirements put in place in the US after the GFC generally did not count 
primary credit borrowing capacity toward a bank’s con tingent liquidity resources (Federal 
Reserve 2003) . Figure 5 summarizes how central bank borrowing capacity is currently 
treated in the supervisory frameworks of Canada, the UK, the eurozone, and Switzerland. A 
comparison to the US shows that some other jurisdictions have gone a bit further to integrate 
central b ank liquidity provision into the regulatory view of banks’ options for contingent 
liquidity management. For example, some jurisdictions permit a bank to count its capacity 
to borrow at the routine standing facility (as measured by pre-positioned collateral value) in 
its internal stress tests and/or resolution funding plans. And some require all eligible banks 
to test usage of the standing facility regularly, as US banking regulators are now considering 
(Johnson 2024). 
Some features of the US institutional f ramework for liquidity provision pose unique 
challenges for stigma reduction that other central banks do not face. For example, the Fed is 
required by law to publish the details of all discount window lending transactions, including 
borrower and amount, at a two-year lag; this disclosure is widely viewed as a factor driving 
699
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 13 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
discount window stigma  (Kelly 2024). No other central bank makes individual borrower 
information available to the public. Moreover, the format of the Fed’s weekly publication of 
balance sheet data causes certain borrowers to be identified by the market within a week of 
borrowing (Kelly 2024). 
A second feature is the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) system. FHLBs are government -
sponsored enterprises that were established in 1932 to provide liquidity to banks to support 
housing finance and community investment  (FHLB n.d.). The FHLB system has grown over 
time to become a large -scale provider of funding to banks beyond the scope of housing 
finance, often on terms more favorable  than tho se at the Fed’s discount window  (Kelly, 
McLaughlin, and Metrick 2024) . The FHLBs are viewed by many banks as a preferable 
alternative to the Fed for obtaining funding in size, due to their ability to lend at longer terms 
than the discount window and their relative operational efficiency and pricing. 
A penalty rate does not necessarily create stigma if the central bank’s standing 
liquidity facility is clearly branded as a tool for sound banks. Figure 2 shows variability 
in practice across central banks with respect to pricing of routine liquidity facilities. Some 
central banks tier loan pricing based on collateral type; some add a premium in pricing term 
lending while others do not. Notably, the BoC, BoE, ECB, and SNB all price their liquidity 
facilities at varying spreads above the policy rate yet observe little or no stigma associated 
with their usage. In contrast, the Fed’s highly stigmatized primary credit program is 
currently priced right at the top of the policy target range. Factors other than price clearly 
matter for stigma. 
Policy Recommendations 
The BoC, BoE, ECB, and SNB have a ll established effective standing liquidity tools that their 
banks are willing to use when needed. Since the GFC, the BoC and the BoE have both revised 
their frameworks for liquidity provision to overcome the stigma associated with earlier 
tools. They did so through clear, ongoing public communication about the framework (as 
shown in the excerpts in Figure 4) and by taking steps to align supervisory expectations with 
the policy message about the legitimacy of use of standing facilities (as summarized in Figure 
5). And as shown in Figure 4, the ECB and the SNB both explicitly describe the on -demand 
standing liquidity facilities for healthy banks as being part of their overall monetary policy 
implementation frameworks. The experiences of these central banks suggest several actions 
the Fed could take, in partnership with the other bank regulators, to establish an on-demand 
liquidity facility that is not highly stigmatized. 
1. Separate the administration and governance of routine, on -demand lending to 
sound banks fr om lending to weaker institutions to support restructuring or 
resolution.  
The experiences of other central banks suggest that drawing a brighter line between funding 
for healthy banks and funding for weak banks with respect to public communication, 
program administration, and governance could help to avoid the stigmatization of tools for 
700
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma McLaughlin

--- Page 14 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
lending to healthy banks by proximity to tools for lending to weaker banks. Redesigning and 
rebranding the Fed’s tools for liquidity provision in a manner that clearly dis tinguishes 
recovery and resolution funding for troubled banks from a new on -demand standing 
liquidity facility for sound institutions is essential to ensure the on -demand facility is not 
stigmatized. 
2. Communicate clearly and resolutely to the public that us e of the new on-demand 
liquidity facility is appropriate for healthy banks —through both policy and 
supervisory channels. 
As noted above, the Fed had some success doing this at its launch of the primary and 
secondary credit programs in 2003. The Fed could leverage its dual role as liquidity provider 
and bank regulator to pursue such alignment again. Aligning supervisory and policy 
messaging to banks that the standing facility is “open for business,” as the BoE describes its 
liquidity provision tools, is crucial to overcome the learned views of bankers (and those who 
invest in or write about them) that borrowing from the central bank is to be avoided at all 
costs. Doing so will make the Fed’s liquidity provision toolset much more effective at 
safeguarding financial stability in stress. 
3. Recalibrate supervisory requirements to support a new routine, on -demand 
lending tool without stigma. 
Aligning regulatory and supervisory requirements for banks’ liquidity risk management with 
the idea that the Fed’s standing liq uidity facility for sound banks is a legitimate source of 
contingent liquidity would go a long way to ward reducing stigma. Some other jurisdictions 
allow banks to count their capacity to borrow at the central bank’s on -demand facility in 
their internal stress tests and/or resolution plans; the US should do this as well. And as noted 
above, the institutional framework for liquidity provision in the US has some features that 
amplify stigma that other central banks do not face. To compensate for these challeng es, 
reducing stigma might thus require the US to go further than others must to incentivize bank 
usage of central bank liquidity facilities when needed. For example, supervisors could count 
some fraction of a sound bank’s pre -positioned loan collateral in the numerator of its 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), on the grounds that this collateral could be monetized on a 
same-day basis at the standing facility or include it in the denominator of the ratio as an 
expected inflow from borrowing from the routine, on-demand facility. 
4. Evaluate whether including banks more fully in the Fed’s counterparty framework 
for monetary policy operations could help to avoid stigmatization of the new on -
demand standing liquidity facility for healthy banks. 
As noted above, in other jurisdictions banks are counterparties to the central bank in its 
monetary policy operations and can obtain liquidity in repo operations in periods when the 
central bank is expanding its balance sheet. Integration of bank borrowing into the monetary 
policy framework can help to reduce the stigma associated with central bank borrowing. An 
evaluation of the extent to which including banks more fully in the Fed’s counterparty 
framework for monetary policy operations could help to mitigate stigma in periods of policy 
701
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 15 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
easing—for example, by creating a new tier of counterparties for repo operations, as has 
been done for reverse repo operations —would be worthwhile. While banks are eligible to 
use the standing repo facility (SRF) that was es tablished in 2021 to support repo market 
functioning, they have generally not used it due to the above -market rate. In contrast, repo 
operations to implement monetary policy are conducted through an auction in which all 
primary dealers are required to part icipate, and which results in an auction -determined 
price. 
5. Improve the timeliness of assessments of bank condition and communicate 
publicly about eligibility for the on-demand facility accordingly. 
Perhaps the greatest difficulty a central bank faces as a lender is determining whether a bank 
is eligible for routine, on-demand liquidity or not. The “solvency” standard that other central 
banks use to determine who can use their on-demand liquidity facility is broad enough that 
it provides some room for judgme nt amid uncertainty about whether the bank is truly a 
going concern or not. 
In contrast, use of a very specific metric such as the composite CAMELS rating —and 
transparency to the public about this decision rule —carries two risks. The first risk is that 
reliance on a very specific metric may constrain judgment about, and flexibility to address, a 
bank’s situation in a stressed market environment. If supervisors downgrade the composite 
rating below 3, the central bank must mechanically deny the bank access to  primary credit, 
regardless of the reason for the downgrade or prospects for recovery. A bank that becomes 
undercapitalized should of course be removed from primary credit, per the FDICIA 
restrictions on lending to undercapitalized banks  (Federal Reserve 2 017). But CAMELS 
downgrades can occur due to downgrades in component ratings other than capital adequacy, 
and there might be situations in which a mechanical denial of primary credit might not be 
the right action to take from a financial stability standpoint. The second risk is that given the 
time lag between supervisory ratings updates and the speed at which a bank’s condition can 
change materially, primary credit can be extended to a bank that is truly troubled, prolonging 
its life when it should in fact be closed. 
As a new on -demand liquidity facility for healthy banks is implemented, eligibility for it 
should be communicated carefully, in a manner that reserves some decision space for policy 
makers to make the difficult determination in real time that a borrower is no longer healthy, 
as other central banks have done. It would also be advisable to supplement CAMELS ratings 
that are often stale with more timely judgments about current and future health when a bank 
comes under pressure, to support the central bank’s lending decisions. The work now being 
undertaken in the US to improve supervisory processes may yield improvements on this 
front. 
Conclusion 
Amid growing debate about the currency of the discount window infrastructure and 
suggestions by Fed offici als that they are looking to support financial stability by 
702
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma McLaughlin

--- Page 16 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
modernizing and destigmatizing discount window lending operations, the time seems ripe 
for consideration of design improvements to address the important issue of stigma. The 
experiences of the BoC, BoE, ECB, and SNB suggest that it is possible to do so—with the right 
framework design; the right communication; and good alignment between policy, regulatory 
and supervisory messages. Fortunately, the design, communication, and supervisory 
changes that are needed to establish an on-demand lending tool that healthy banks can and 
will use lies largely within the Fed’s and the other banking regulators’ existing authorities. 
  
703
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 17 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
References 
Bank of Canada (BoC). 2021. Framework for Market Operations and Liquidity Provision. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/11190/ 
Bank of England (BoE). 2019. “Appendix 2: The Bank of England’s Statement of Policy on 
Funding in Resolution,” July 2019.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5216 
———. 2025. “Bank of England Market Operations Guide,” 2025. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=12210&context=ypfs-
documents 
Barr, Michael S. 2024. “On Building a Resilient Regulatory Framework. Speech by Michael S. 
Barr.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5217 
de Groen, Willem Pieter. 2018. “Financing Bank Resolution: An Alternative Solution for 
Arranging the Liquidity Required.” Economic Governance Support Unit, Directorate-
General for Internal Policies of the Union, PE 624.423. November 2018. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5466 
Derby, Michael S. 2024. “Fed’s Logan Hails Progress in Prepping Banks for Discount 
Window.” Reuters, July 18, 2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5219 
European Central Bank (ECB). 2015. “Guideline (EU) 2015/510 of the European Central 
Bank of 19 December 2014 on the Implementation of the Eurosystem Monetary Policy 
Framework (ECB/2014/60).” Official Journal of the European Union, Guidelines L. 91. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5229 
———. 2024. “Changes to the Operational Framework for Implementing Monetary Policy.” 
Press release, March 13, 2024, March 13, 2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5467 
———. n.d. “The Eurosystem’s Instruments.” Website. Accessed February 17, 2025. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5291/ 
Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB). n.d. “FHLBanks Office of Finance.” Webpage. Accessed 
January 16, 2025.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5221 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY). n.d. “Primary Dealers—Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York.” Webpage. Accessed January 16, 2025. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5222 
Federal Reserve, Board of Governors of the (Fed). 2002. “Extensions of Credit by Federal 
704
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma McLaughlin

--- Page 18 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
Reserve Banks.” 12 CFR Part 201: Regulation A; Docket No. R-1123. Federal Register 67, 
No. 110, May 24, 2002, May 24, 2002.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5218 
———. 2003. “Agencies Issue Guidance on Approriate Use of Discount Window.” Joint 
Press Release, July 23, 2003, July 23, 2003.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5230 
———. 2017. “Federal Reserve Act.” Section 10B: Advances to Individual Member Banks. 
Webpage.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4026 
———. 2020. “Frequently Asked Questions - Domestic LISCC Firms.” Webpage. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5220 
———. 2023. “Operating Circular No. 10: Lending.” 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4032 
———. 2024a. “Discount Window Lending.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System. Webpage.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4040 
———. 2024b. “Primary and Secondary Lending Programs.” Webpage. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4046 
Furfine, Craig. 2004. “Standing Facilities and Interbank Borrowing: Evidence from the 
Federal Reserve’s New Discount Window.” Working Papers WP 2004-01, 2004. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5223 
Johnson, Katanga. 2024. “US Prepares Rule Forcing Banks to Tap Fed Discount Window.” 
Bloomberg, January 18, 2024.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5224 
Kelly, Steven. 2024. “Weekly Fed Report Still Drives Discount Window Stigma.” Yale 
Program on Financial Stability.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/15055 
Kelly, Steven, Susan McLaughlin, and Andrew Metrick. 2024. “FHLB Dividends: Low-
Hanging Fruit for Reconfiguring FHLB Lending.” Journal of Financial Crises 6, No. 2, January. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss2/4 
Lee, Helene, and Asani Sarkar. 2016. “Is There Discount Window Stigma in the United 
Kingdom?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Liberty Street Economics (blog). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5225 
  
705
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 7 Iss. 1

--- Page 19 ---
POLICY NOTE 
 
 
———. 2018. “Is Stigma Attached to the European Central Bank’s Marginal Lending 
Facility?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Liberty Street Economics (blog). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5226 
Madigan, Brian, and William R. Nelson. 2002. “Proposed Revision to the Federal Reserve’s 
Discount Window Lending Programs.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 88, No. 7, May. 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/4047 
McLaughlin, Susan. 2023. “Lessons for the Discount Window from the March 2023 Bank 
Failures.” Yale Program on Financial Stability. Systemic Risk (blog). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/15053 
———. 2024a. “Discount Window Stigma: What’s Design Got to Do with It?” Journal of 
Financial Crises 6, No. 3.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol6/iss3/26/ 
———. 2024b. “Eliminating Discount Window Stigma: What Can We Learn from Abroad?” 
Yale School of Management. Yale Program on Financial Stability. Systemic Risk (blog). 
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents/15054 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). 2012. Comptroller’s Handbook: Liquidity. 
Version 1.0, June 2012.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5227 
Stackhouse, Julie L. 2018. “The ABCs of CAMELS.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
Webpage.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/5228 
Swiss National Bank (SNB). 2023. “Guidelines of the Swiss National Bank on Monetary 
Policy Instruments,” May 5, 2023.  
https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-documents2/2256 
 
 
This open access article is distributed under the terms of the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license, which allows 
sharing of this work provided the original author and source are cited. The work may not be changed 
or used commercially. 
706
Eliminating Discount Window Stigma McLaughlin