--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 8 Issue 1 
2026 
Lessons Learned: Ignazio Visco Lessons Learned: Ignazio Visco 
Mercedes Cardona 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Cardona, Mercedes (2026) "Lessons Learned: Ignazio Visco," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 8 : Iss. 1, 
70-73. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1683 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol8/iss1/6 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol8/iss1/6

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
   
 
Ignazio Visco 
By Mercedes Cardona 
Ignazio Visco served as deputy director general (the equivalent of deputy governor) of the Bank 
of Italy during the Global Financial Crisis of 200 7–09 (GFC) and as governor during the 
European Sovereign Debt Crisis in 2011 (SDC). During his multidecade tenure at the bank, he 
held several positions and served under nine prime ministers before stepping down in 2023. 
Although Italy had the third -largest economy in the eu rozone, its banking sector had little 
exposure to mortgages, which resulted in its being somewhat less impacted by the GFC than 
other countries. However, the SDC had a severe impact. With the assistance of European Union 
(EU) programs, the country was able to recapitalize and stabilize its banks, but its economy 
continued to falter through the decade, and the nation was one of the first in Europe to be 
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. This Lessons Learned summary is based on an interview 
held in January 2024; the full transcript may be found here. 
Crises take many forms and are unpredictable. The best prevention is to implement 
policies before a crisis to encourage banks to maintain capital ratios sufficient to meet 
situational stresses and to have proper oversight of nonperforming loans. 
The banking sector of Italy, the third-largest economy in the EU, was not as directly affected 
by the GFC as those in other countries because Italy did not have the kind of mortgage market 
that influenced the trajectory of the crisis in the United States or in other European countries. 
The country experienced effects mostly in the trade segment.  However, as Visco sums up : 
“What can the banking system, even the best banking system in the world, do when you have 
a collapse of this size anywhere in the world or of the real economy?”   
The real shock to Italy was the Sovereign Debt Crisis  that began in 2011. Although Italy 
lacked some of the negative factors of other EU member countries—it did not have the same 
budget imbalances that plagued Greece, the negative foreign debt balance of Portugal, nor 
the real estate loan problems of Ireland or Spain —the country did have substantial public 
debt, at a high level among the eurozone member countries.  “It was immediately perceived 
by the markets that countries that had high public debt had to reduce it in order to maintain 
their participation in the monetary union, which was obvious,” said Visco. 
But the problem soon escalated. The eurozone was working with a single currency and 
monetary policy, and for years the spread among the debt of member countries had 
remained small. But its members had individual fiscal polic ies to consider and as the SDC 
began the interest rates o n the sovereign debt of member countries  began to diverge.  This 
development struck Italy hard, remembered Visco, who questioned the size of the 
differentials that began to appear among the debt of different member countries —“the 
elasticity, if you want—between the positions, the imbalances, and the differential in interest 
rates was extremely nonlinear and large.” He noted: 
70

--- Page 4 ---
At the beginning of July [2012] I had given an interview to the main Italian newspaper, 
the Corriere della Sera, in which I basically said that the current differential between 
Italian and German 10-year bonds, which was between 550 and 600 basis points, was 
really ridiculous. At the most, our analys es were giving estimates of [a] 200 [point 
spread]. All the rest was exactly this nonlinearity of market expectations  that 
provided these increases in the interest rate differential. 
Italy was caught in the middle, trying to support its economy as EU members demanded 
austerity measures that would likely depress the economy further and worsen the crisis, 
Visco noted. Additionally, the sovereign debt and related liquidity concerns were weakening 
the banks , and r ecapitalizing banks in the middle of a downturn is n ever easy, Visco 
acknowledged. He elaborated: 
Italy has never had major banks, except one or two. All the others were rather small, 
medium-sized banks. They did not have very high capital ratios. They were many co-
ops, which was a problem in terms of governance, because they were not managed 
particularly well.  
Many of the banks also did not have strong oversight of their large number of nonperforming 
loans (NPLs).  
When economic growth slowed down during the GFC and subsequently the SDC, Italian 
banks were affected by the resulting capital and liquidity crunches. But, Visco remembered, 
the country’s efforts to recapitalize its banking system were hobbled by its public debt issues 
and developments in EU policy: 
But the problem is , we could not put in any  more money. You have to start with the 
Global Financial Crisis, which hit a number of banking systems in the world 
dramatically. Certainly the US, but very much Germany, the Netherlands, later Spain, 
and Ireland, and public money was used massively. Not at all in Italy, [despite there 
being] a law that allowed the government to recapitalize banks to an extent. But at 
the end, the total amount of money was a few billion euros. 
In Germany, it was hundreds of billion euros that were used massively between 2008 
and 2010. Then the Germans started getting worried. Indeed, [they] pushed all the 
Europeans to agree during the Sovereign Debt Crisis to a new regime of State Aid with 
the banking resolution regime —a regulation and directive that basically made state 
money not available to banks any more, even for those systems that had not had any 
crisis before. 
Given its significant public debt, there was  little fiscal capacity in Italy to fund 
recapitalizations and no market to liquidate NPLs as the worse effects of the SDC developed. 
Visco said:  
Italy was caught in the middle in 2013–14 and could not intervene. Basically, we had 
failures of very small banks. The banks that failed had less than 1% of the total assets 
of the banking system in Italy. But the impact they had on the rest —either for those 
71
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 8 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
who were listed, or in general, the effects they had on rates and ratings —was very 
strong, very large. 
But with help from the EU, Visco explained, Italian banks were able to clean up their NPLs, 
clear out some of the excesses in the banking systems  and work though the cycle . He  
reflected:  
One lesson we certainly understood is that commercial banks have to be well 
capitalized. Probably, during the financial crisis, or coming into the financial crisis, 
they were not capitalized enough. You need to have capital and liquidity ratios which 
are monitored and which are continuously maintained at sufficiently prudent levels. 
Many of the Italian banks were small co-ops which, in addition to having inadequate capital 
ratios, presented unique issues. Visco explained, “you needed to have all the shareholders 
agree to put in the money, and some of them could not have outside money, it all had to be 
generated internally, so it was a long process.” Eventually, however, the banks were 
recapitalized and this led to a solution for the NPL problem, said Visco. 
Fighting a major crisis requires coordinated efforts by the central bank and the 
government. The central bank’s role is limited as is what i mpact monetary policy can 
have, and officials must recognize that once the crisis subsides, recovery will require 
economic growth that must be stimulated by the government.  
Italy’s experience during the GFC and SDC resulted in a double-dip recession, with its GDP 
dropping 10% and industrial production nearly 25%. Recovery from the recession required 
a rebound of real economic growth, something that could not be brought about by monetary 
policy alone, noted Visco.  
Central banks cannot increase the permanent rate of growth of an economy. They can 
provide for support if [it is ]needed and does not contrast with inflationary pressures. 
But it is still money, it is not the real economy. You need to transform the system 
through both policy and decisions on the real economy from the market.  
Monetary policy during and after a crisi s operates alongside other policy measures , Visco 
insisted, and r ecovery in the real economy is necessary to optimize efforts made by the 
central bank. In Italy, he explained, there were a number of fundamental weaknesses in the 
economic infrastructure that hampered the bank’s efforts. .   
The big problem in Italy is productivity and innovation, which have been low since 
the major transformations at the end of the last century. Human capital was not really  
able to match the major transformation in production modes. In the global economy, 
we were competing with emerging economies, rather than advanced economies, but 
with much higher wages and costs. There was a problem of firm competitiveness. 
There was a delay in adjusting to the major transformation of the 1 990s: 
demographics, globalization, ICT  [information, communications, and technology ], 
and so on. 
72
Lessons Learned: Ignazio Visco Cardona

--- Page 6 ---
Visco said he addressed parliament several times during the crises about the need to revive 
growth in Italy by making the business climate more favorable, redu cing excessive 
regulation, increasing labor flexibility and other regulatory changes that would help reduce 
costs and enable Italy to be more competitive. However, he was unable “to convince them to 
put most of the resources in investment programs —human capital, physical, and so on —
rather than in transfers and subsidies .” It was difficult to persuade government officials to 
invest in such long-term programs because of their different perspectives. Visco explained:  
The difference between a central banker and a government official is really linked to 
the time horizon , and we have longer time horizons. Therefore, it is easier for us to 
say to ministers: “Look for a longer period .” But they say: “We have the election  [on 
the] next day,” and every time there is a new election. ” Therefore, they have to 
promise something to the population. And you never promise that 20 years from now, 
the world will be much better. You will say: “Tomorrow you will pay less taxes.”  
Viscos cited the country’s COVID -19 experience as an example of the convergence of crisis -
fighting and economic impact  and saw some signs of hope:  When the pandemic struck in 
2020, Italy was the  first European country to go into lockdown and experience economic 
dislocation. But “the air had changed” in Europe, said Visco, and EU programs to counter the 
pandemic were more cooperative than those employed to deal with the Sovereign Debt 
Crisis. The EU provided substantial resources to countries to make the investments 
necessary to support economic activity.  
However, observed Visco, many of the pandemic support programs in Italy took the form of 
direct transfers and subsidies, rather than investment programs that would have addressed 
some of the underlying structural weaknesses of the economy. He urged government officials 
to consider long-term implications when responding to a crisis and deciding where to target 
resources.  
Dated: March 2026 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2022–29 
 
 
73
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 8 Iss. 1