--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Financial Crises Journal of Financial Crises 
Volume 8 Issue 1 
2026 
Lessons Learned: Christos Gortsos Lessons Learned: Christos Gortsos 
Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Follow this and additional works at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Wiggins, Rosalind Z. (2026) "Lessons Learned: Christos Gortsos," Journal of Financial Crises: Vol. 8 : Iss. 
1, 56-58. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.17132/2693-3179.1680 
Available at: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-crises/vol8/iss1/3 
This Lessons Learned is brought to you for free and open access by the Journal of Financial Crises and 
EliScholar – A Digital Platform for Scholarly Publishing at Yale. For more information, please contact 
journalfinancialcrises@yale.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
READERS TAKE NOTICE: READERS TAKE NOTICE: 
As of April 2024, the YPFS Resource Library’s site domain has changed 
to https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ypfs-financial-crisis-resource-library/. 
Please be aware that upon clicking any of the URL references to 
the former Resource Library domains, either https://ypfs.som.yale.edu 
or https://ypfsresourcelibrary.blob.core.windows.net/, in the 
"References/Key Program Documents" section of a case study, 
readers will encounter a "page not found" error. readers will encounter a "page not found" error. 
Readers can still retrieve a given resource cited within this case study 
on the new site  by searching by searching here  for the title cited. for the title cited. 
This lessons learned is available in Journal of Financial Crises: https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/journal-of-financial-
crises/vol8/iss1/3

--- Page 3 ---
Yale Program on Financial Stability 
Lessons Learned 
 
Christos Gortsos 
By Rosalind Z. Wiggins 
Christos Gortsos has been a professor of law at the National  and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens since 2016 as well as a visiting professor of law at various other European institutions. 
Previously, he was a professor of international economic law and hel d other positions at 
Panteion University of Social and Political Sciences in Athens. He has taught and written 
extensively on European and international banking and financial law, capital markets 
regulation, and law and economics. From 2000  to 2017, he served as secretary of the Hellenic 
Bank Association. He advises the European Parliament on bank resolution and is vice president 
of the Board of Appeal of the European Supervisory Authorities. This Lessons Learned summary 
is based on an interview conducted in October 2023; the full transcript may be found here. 
Officials should think as broadly and creatively as possible when considering risks, 
even if they seem improbable, and then address any gaps in the financial stability 
framework before a crisis occurs. 
Having been a close observer of the Greek banking industry, Gortsos shared his thoughts on 
the industry’s experience during the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–09 (GFC) and then the 
Sovereign Debt Crisis of 2010–2012 (SDC).  He pointed out that the GFC did not pose a “threat 
to the financial stability” because the “Greek banking system in 2008 was quite resilient.” He 
elaborated: 
Greek banks were not exposed to the so-called toxic assets from securitization, which 
were around all over  the world. At that time, by coincidence and not necessarily by 
prudence, the Greek banks were profitable and affluent for other reasons. 
 Still, remarked Gortsos, just as a banking crisis may negatively affect the real sector of the 
economy (as in the U nited States ) or even the fiscal stance (as in Ireland) , in Greece the 
opposite happened, with the fiscal crisis affecting the banking system. 
At the beginning of 2010, the Greek government disclosed that its deficit level was 13%, well 
in excess of the 3% E uropean Union (EU) maximum level permitted. In April of that year, it 
stated that it could not service its huge debt of EUR 240 billion, a significant portion of which 
was held by Greek banks. The possibility of the country’s default on its debt caught the  
government and the EU woefully unprepared , largely , said Gortsos, because the parties 
involved thought these events to be so highly unlikely that no response measures had been 
adopted. 
First, we can remark the following: the fact that Greece and other countries, who also 
defaulted then—namely, Portugal, Ireland, and Cyprus—revealed a weakness that I 
would term as a “disaster myopia.” Disaster myopia means that you have a very low 
probability risk, which you expect will never materialize. And when it [does] 
materialize, the cost may be [dis]proportionally very high. 
56

--- Page 4 ---
That reflects the fact that Greece and the other countries were not operating in an 
environment where they would be exposed to foreign exchange risk because their 
currency was the single  currency, the euro. This means that no one would have 
perceived [that] those countries which had adopted the euro [but were] on the verge 
of default, could ultimately fail. This was a problem of perception. 
At the same time, the EU rules governing economi c governance did not contain any 
robust rules on sovereign crisis management. This came up as a problem because of 
the crisis. There was nothing in place like [an] EU or, if you wish, a eurozone, IMF 
[equivalent]. That means that it was not yet conceived that a country whose currency 
is the euro could end up in a situation where it would not be able to refinance its 
outstanding debt in the markets and would need to resort to last-resort lending.  
So, when Greece declared that it could [no longer] refinance its outstanding debt, the 
markets were asking for an interest rate premium of up to 20%, in euro. Thus Greece 
was de facto excluded from the markets. The problem became then who would 
finance that gap. The obvious candidate was the IMF, which has been a le nder of last 
resort since its establishment. 
However, Gortsos continued, the IMF limited what it would loan to the amount of Greece’s 
quota (approximately EUR 30 billion) and so Greece and the EU had to scramble and design 
new instruments, a sovereign crisis management mechanism, to fill the gap.  
Changes made after a crisis can help prepare the banking system to withstand the next 
one. However, risks evolve, so review and preparation should be continuous. 
Gortsos described the substantial changes and enhancements to its banking regulatory 
system that the EU made following the GFC and SDC; many  have proven effective. He 
specifically identified the enhancements to prudential regulation and supervision reflective 
of the Basel III framework as having had a positive effect. 
The objective of these buffers is to assure that if a crisis like the COVID-19 crisis were 
to happen, then the capital buffers could be release d to allow banks to absorb losses 
without being in danger of overstepping minimum regulatory capital requirements. 
So, COVID was a very good test that the rules adopted in the post-GFC era, mainly the 
Basel III rules on capital adequacy, liquidity, and cap ital buffers, as well as the 
macroprudential financial oversight framework, were all necessary.  
And in that respect, banks in all countries, including in my country, were in a position 
to continue lending to the economy and supporting the real economy without putting 
the stability of the financial system in danger.  
Gortsos also praised other new EU infrastructure such as the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
which brought al l banks under the supervision of the European Central Bank ( ECB) and 
national banks , with the largest being directly supervised by the ECB. “ That bold 
development was a response to the finding that one of the major causes of the GFC was not 
57
Journal of Financial Crises Vol. 8 Iss. 1

--- Page 5 ---
primarily the lack of adequate prudential rules, but rather the lack of adequate supervision,” 
he said, noting that it was something he had often written about.  
He also praised the bank resolution mechanism and expansion of the deposit insurance 
scheme. However, there is still more to be done.  In Europe, the banking insolvency rules 
have not yet been harmonized , he said, and there is not a single deposit insurance scheme. 
Inside the EU and outside as well, he cites the largely unregulated shadow banking system 
and recent developments such as crypto currency and the possibility of cyberattacks as risks 
that need to be addressed. 
Dated: March 2026 
YPFS Lessons Learned No. 2023–32  
 
58
Lessons Learned: Christos Gortsos Wiggins